Embedded Word MCA Biplots for Sentiment Visualisation: 
Application to COVID-19 Related Tweets

Zoe-Mae Adams, Johane Nienkemper-Swanepoel, Niel le Roux, and Sugnet Lubbe

Social media platforms are continually gaining popularity which results in vast
amounts of shared data in the form of images, videos and text. Twitter is a micro-
blogging platform which allows the sharing of short messages that are labelled
according to a specific key word (i.e. tag), representing a relevant topic or theme.
These messages reflect personal opinions with subjective content which could provide 
insight to grasp the underlying attitude towards specific topics. During the global 
COVID-19 pandemic users could easily share messages by using social media platforms 
containing information on for example regulations on lockdown or vaccination. Twitter’s 
application programming interface (API) allows the procurement of posts made on the 
platform for a specific Twitter tag, timeframe and location within a specified radius. 
In this study the unstructured pieces of text, Tweets, are processed and the sentiment 
of the remaining words are classified using two lexicons. Multi-dimensional visualisation 
enables the exploration of the associations between the Twitter users based on the resultant 
sentiment scores of their posts. A multiple correspondence analysis (MCA) biplot is embedded 
with the extracted words to enable the simultaneous interpretation of the underlying sentiment 
of the processed Tweets. This paper presents two case studies of COVID-19 related Tweets.
The first case study considers posts made by South African users in three cities (Cape
Town, Johannesburg and Durban), with the second case study evaluating the sentiment towards 
COVID-19 on a global scale by considering three predominantly English-speaking countries 
(South Africa, Australia and United Kingdom).

Keywords: biplots, covid-19 tweets, multiple correspondence analysis, 
          sentiment classification, web scraping




















