Joint Sparse Principal Component Analysis A Simulation Study

Tra Le and Dr. Katrijn Van Deun

Measurement invariance is of great importance in the social and behavioral sciences, 
as it allows for generalization of latent constructs across different groups,
typically by investigating the equality of factor structures. Traditionally, in settings
where the loadings for the different groups are not known beforehand, exploratory
factor analysis is commonly used. However, it has several drawbacks, including that
most methods cannot handle data with fewer observations than variables and other
problems (subjective thresholds for loading differences, unrealistic assumptions, 
instability with small sample size, large amount of computational sources needed,
etc.). To overcome these drawbacks, joint sparse principal component analysis (joint
SPCA) has been proposed, which adopts a regularized and cardinality constrained
least-square approach. The aim of this paper is to compare it with the best available
EFA method, namely multigroup factor rotation (MGFR) [1] A simulation study
was carried out to evaluate the performance of joint SPCA in comparison with the
MGFR technique, on three types of performance measures: recovery rate of the
zero/non-zero pattern in the loadings, Tucker’s congruence, and computation time.
Following the setup by [1], we varied the number of groups, group sizes, number
of components, type and size of loading differences, and the number of loading
differences. Based on the first two measures, joint SPCA performed slightly less
well than MGFR which reported a goodness-of-loading-recovery statistic for optimally 
rotated loadings of .99. Averaged across 6000 simulated datasets, joint SPCA
had a recovery rate and Tucker congurence of .96 (SD = .06) and .98 (SD = .02),
respectively. The CPU time increased as the conditions got more complex. Averaged
across 50 replications for each condition, the shortest time was 5.3s (2 groups) and
the longest time was 21.3s (4 groups) on an i5 processor with 8GB RAM.

Keywords: multigroup, pca, measurement invariance

References
1. De Roover, K., Vermunt, J.: On the exploratory road to unraveling factor 
   loading  noninvariance: A new multigroup rotation approach. Struct. Equ. Model. 
   26, 905–923 (2019)




















