Categorical Data Visualization and the Cressie-Read Divergence Statistic

Eric J. Beh and Rosaria Lombardo

The literature on correspondence analysis is largely centred on Pearson’s chi-squared
statistic (Greenacre, 1984; Beh and Lombardo, 2014). For such an analysis, differences 
between categories is assessed using the chi-squared distance while distances
in a low-dimensional space are Euclidean. Recently, Beh and Lombardo (2022)
showed that the Cressie-Read divergence statistic (Cressie and Read, 1984) plays
a pivotal role in correspondence analysis. This is because Pearson’s statistic, the
Freeman-Tukey statistic, the log-likelihood ratio statistic and others are special cases
of this statistic. Therefore, differences amongst categories can be assessed using this
divergence statistic and still yield Euclidean distances in a low-dimensional space.
This is very appealing since it provides a greater range of difference measures, including 
the chi-squared, Hellinger and logarithmic distances.This paper compares the quality and 
configuration of points in a low-dimensional correspondence plot using the Cressie-Read 
divergence statistic. This will be done by deriving a global measure that allows for such 
a comparison and is an extension of a similar measure presented in the past; see, for example, 
Cuadras, Cuadras and Greenacre (2006).

Keywords: pearson’s chi-squared, cressie-read divergence statistic, comparison

References
1. Beh, E.J., Lombardo, R.: Correspondence analysis: Theory, practice and new strategies.
   Wiley, Chichester (2014)
2. Beh, E.J., Lombardo, R.: Correspondence analysis and the Cressie-Read Divergence Statistic.
   Submitted (2022)
3. Cressie, N.A.C., Read, T.R.C.: Multinomial goodness-of-fit tests. Journal of the Royal
   Statistical Society, Series B, 46, 440–464 (1984)
4. Cuadras, C.M., Cuadras, D., Greenacre, M.J.: A Comparison of Different Methods for
   Representing Categorical Data. Communications in Statistics - Simulation and Computation,
   35, 447–459 (2006)
5. Greenacre, M.: Theory and application of correspondence analysis. Academic Press, London
   (1984)





















