Analysis of the Damage Rate Using Typhoon Information

Su Hoon Choi and Min Soo Kim

According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the scale and intensity
of damage are increasing as well as the frequency of meteorological disasters due to
global warming. Typhoon usually occur between July and October, so they are similar
to the harvest of crops, causing a lot of damage to farmers. In order to minimize
damage to farmers caused by meteorological disasters, South Korea has implemented
crop insurance since 2001. This study aims to analyze typhoon and damage rate by
using crop insurance data. Since crop insurance is measured objectively and fairly
for accurate actual damage judgment, analysis using crop insurance data is expected
to be highly reliable. It will identify and analyze the relationship between typhoon
information and the damage rate, and further present the expected typhoon damage
rate for future typhoon. Considering the characteristics of the analysis data, the
zero-inflated beta regression will be used to analyze the damage rate. In addition,
by using Random Forest and XGBoost, which are representative machine learning
models, we intend to compare the prediction results between models. As a result of
the prediction, the performance of machine learning models was better than zeroinflated 
beta regression. The results of this analysis are expected to be used not only to predict 
the expected damage rate for future typhoon but also to prepare measures to reduce damage 
to farmers.

Keywords: typhoon, crop insurance, zero-inflated beta regression, machine learning

References
1. Tang, B., Frye, H.A., Gelfand, A.E., Silander Jr, J.A.: Zero-inflated Beta distribution 
   regression modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.07249 (2021)
2. Breiman, L.: Random forests. Machine learning, 45(1), 5-32 (2001)
3. Chen, T., Guestrin, C.: Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 
   22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, 785-794 
   (2016)






















