Modeling Three-Way RNA Sequencing Data Using Data Transformations and Matrix-Variate
Gaussian Mixture Models

Theresa Scharl and Bettina Grun

RNA sequencing of time-course experiments leads to three-way count data where
the dimensions are the genes, the time points and the biological units. Clustering
of RNA-seq data allows to detect groups of co-expressed genes over time. After
standardization, the counts of individual genes across time points and biological
units constitute compositional data. Rau and Maugis [1] propose an approach for
analyzing two-way RNA-seq data where they only have genes and time points as
dimensions or the biological units are flattened out. For two-way data, they investigate
the use of data transformations in conjunction with Gaussian mixture models. In this
work we want to extend their approach to three-way data and investigate suitable
data transformations for three-way data before clustering the data using matrixvariate 
Gaussian mixture models. Finite mixtures of matrix-variate distributions are
implemented in the R package MatTransMix [2]. Using a matrix-variate Gaussian
mixture model already represents a more parsimonious model formulation than
using a Gaussian mixture model after flattening out the biological units. Additional
parsimonity may be gained by assuming that different sets of parameters are identical
across clusters, thus allowing also for an easier interpretation of the fitted model.
The proposed three-way clustering approach will be applied to RNA-seq data from
E. coli bioproduction processes and also compared to the two-way approach after
flattening out the biological units.

Keywords: model-based clustering, three-way data, rna sequencing

References
1. Rau, A., Maugis-Rabusseau, C.: Transformation and model choice for RNA-seq co-expression
  analysis. Brief. Bioinformatics 19, 425–436 (2018)
2. Zhu, X., Sarkar, S., Melnykov, V.: MatTransMix: an R Package for Matrix Model-Based
   Clustering and Parsimonious Mixture Modeling. J Classif 39, 147–170 (2022)






















