Time Resolved Feature Importance of a Biopharmaceutical Purification Process Using
Permutation Based Methods

Matthias Medl, Theresa Scharl, Astrid Dürauer, and Friedrich Leisch

Real-time monitoring of critical process parameters of biotechnological processes
is a major step towards quality-by-design in the production of biopharmaceuticals.
The emergence of novel monitoring devices has resulted in the accumulation of
complex high-dimensional data. Recently, statistical models capable of predicting
critical process parameters online -e.g. the product or impurity concentration- have
been developed. However, to generate these models the variable space has been
reduced manually based on expert knowledge. This presents a problem as (a) expert
knowledge is not always available, especially for novel technologies, (b) experts
might overlook important variables and (c) the importance of some variables might
be unknown in general. Therefore, we propose a deep learning framework capable
of predicting critical process parameters of a biopharmaceutical purification process
based on the whole high-dimensional variable space (1400 variables). To achieve
this, a neural network architecture consisting of two parallel strands that are 
concatenated at the end has been developed. One strand consists of fully connected layers
and takes standalone variables -e.g. pH, conductivity- as input, while the other strand
consists of convolutional layers and utilizes whole Fourier transform infrared spectra
as input. Using this method, the model itself learns, which variables contain useful
information or not. By determining the variable importances with the model, 
(a) previously unknown correlations and patterns can be identified to gain further 
understanding about the underlying mechanics of the purification process and 
(b) more accurate models can be generated that utilize all informative variables available.

Keywords: deep learning, variable importance, permutation, bioprocess






















