Continuous Adaptation to Distribution Drifts Through Continual Learning in Manufacturing

Henrique Siqueira and Onay Urfalioglu

Distribution drifts usually occur in the context of time series processing in manufacturing. 
The causes for this problem include continual optimization of cutting processes in machining 
and incremental precision loss from long-term stress exerted on the machine’s components. 
Therefore, it is critical to understand the performance of machine learning (ML) models for 
anomaly detection in manufacturing under distribution drifts for reliable and robust virtual 
quality control.
  In fact, the generalization capability of ML models is strongly compromised when
performing inference under a distribution different from the training data [1]. As a
result, these models can have a significant drop in performance with a negative impact
on overall equipment effectiveness (OEE). OEE is the gold standard in manufacturing
that defines productivity based on availability, performance and quality. In this
regard, OEE decreases when workpieces produced under the new distribution are
wrongly categorized as faulty workpieces, slowing down the manufacturing process
by unnecessary and excessive manual quality measurements.
  To avoid this kind of problem in production, anomaly detection systems must
be constantly evaluated, if necessary, retrained to the new data distribution and redeployed. 
Instead of adopting a manual and time-demanding workflow, continual learning approaches could 
acquire novel information from a continuous data stream. This property can possibly endow those 
systems with continuous adaptation to contextual distribution drifts [2]. In the present study, 
we aim to investigate how continual learning concepts can be exploited for the development of 
anomaly detection systems with continuous adaptation to distribution drifts on real-world 
manufacturing data.

Keywords: continual learning, anomaly detection, manufacturing

References
1. Liang, W. and Zou, J.: MetaShift: A Dataset of Datasets for Evaluating Contextual 
   Distribution Shifts and Training Conflicts. In ICLR (2022).
2. Mundt, M., Lang, S., Delfosse, Q. and Kersting, K.: CLEVA-Compass: A Continual 
   Learning EValuation Assessment Compass to Promote Research Transparency and Comparability. 
   In ICLR (2022).






















