Robustness and Initialization Issues in Subspace Clustering

Luis A. García-Escudero and Agustín Mayo-Iscar

Observations are often assumed to cluster around lower-dimensional affine linear
subspaces. In fact, this is one of the most frequently applied approaches when
dealing with high or moderately high dimensional clustering problems. There are
several subspace clustering approaches in the literature that attempt to find such
clusters and their associated optimal underlying subspaces.
  The detrimental effect that even a few outliers can have on cluster analysis,
sometimes affecting even the correct determination of clusters, is well known. Robust
subspace clustering methods try to discover those linear subspaces while avoiding
the effect of outlying values. Detecting anomalies in the data can be an interesting
problem in itself, as well as taking advantage of the subspace clustering structure to
”reconstruct” the data prior to the data contamination process.
  Some robustified subspace clustering methods, that follow from the application of
trimming principles, will be reviewed. A proportion \alpha of entire cases were proposed
to be trimmed in [1] and a proportion \alpha of individual cells were trimmed in [2]. These
approaches provide good robustness but require the specification of a trimming rate
\alpha. A proposal will be presented to determine \alpha based on the data.
  The initialization of the iterative algorithms used to implement these trimming
procedures is one of the most critical aspects for the good performance of these
algorithms. Useful initialization strategies will also be provided.

Keywords: subspace clustering, robustness, high-dimensions

References
1. García-Escudero, L.A., Gordaliza, A., San Martin, R., Van Aelst, S., Zamar, R.: Robust linear
   clustering. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B 71, 301–318 (2009)
2. García-Escudero, L.A., Rivera-García, D., Mayo-Iscar, A., Ortega, J.: Cluster analysis with
   cellwise trimming and applications for the robust clustering of curves. Inf. Sci. 573, 100–124
   (2021)






















