The Clustering Performance of a Weighted Combined Distance Between Time Series

Margarida G. M. S. Cardoso, Ana Alexandra Martins, and João Lagarto

Recently, [1], we proposed a new dissimilarity measure between time series - COMB,
a uniform convex combination of four (normalized) distance measures: Euclidean;
Pearson correlation based; Periodogram based; and a distance between estimated 
autocorrelation structures. In this work, we propose a method to determine the 
weights of the convex combination of distances in COMB: it relies on the concordance
of clusterings obtained by each individual distance measure and COMB derived
clustering. A weighted COMB measure is thus obtained, WCOMB. We then test
the clustering performance of WCOMB vs. COMB by conducting an experimental
analysis on all the time series datasets of the UCR archive. We evaluate the 
concordance between the clusters obtained using K-Medoids and the original classes 
(using adjusted Rand index) as well as the cohesion-separation of the clusters (using 
the Silhouette index). In addition, we consider a clustering application - with data 
from the Portuguese Transmission System Operator, on time series of electricity 
consumption  (2014 to 2019) - to compare the performance of both methods. Significant
differences between the average Silhouette values of clusters obtained were found.
The concordance with the original classes’ structure exhibits similar performance in
both approaches. We conclude that, for unsupervised leaning, it can be worthwhile
to invest on deriving specific weights for the distances integrating COMB.

Keywords: clustering, distance measures, time series

References
1. Cardoso, M.G.M.S., Martins, A.A.: The performance of a combined distance between time
   series. In: Bispo, R., Henriques-Rodrigues, L., Alpizar-Jara, R. and de Carvalho, M. 
   (eds.) Recent Developments in Statistics and Data Science - Proceedings of the XXV 
   Congress of the Portuguese Statistical Society. Springer. (to be published)






















