Symbolic Clustering Methods Applied to Interval Estimates of Production Cost Quantiles

Dominique Desbois

The decision to adopt one or another of the sustainable land management alternatives
should not be based solely on their respective benefits in terms of climate change
mitigation, but also on the performance of the productive systems used by the farms,
assessing their environmental impacts through the cost of the specific resources
used. This communication presents applications of the symbolic clustering methods,
proposed in [1, 2] for interval data, to conditional quantile estimates of production
costs in agriculture. The interval data clustering tools are used to obtain typologies of
European countries and regions, on the basis of the conditional quantile distributions
of agricultural production cost empirical estimates. A procedure to find optimal
partitions along with various criteria is used. Some standard statistical tests are
proceed. This work extends preliminary results published in [3]. The comparative
analysis of the econometric results for the main products between European countries
and regions illustrates the relevance of the typologies obtained for national and
international comparisons based on their specific input productivity.

Keywords: symbolic clustering, interval data, quantile estimates, agricultural production costs, 
          micro-economics

References
1. Carvalho, F., Souza, R., Chavent, M., Lechevallier, Y.: Adaptive Hausdorff distances and
   dynamic clustering of symbolic interval data. Pattern Recognition Letters, 27(3), 167–179 (2006)
2. Chavent, M., Lechevalier, Y., Briant, O.: DIVCLUS-T: A monothetic divisive hierarchical
   clustering method. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, 52(2), 687–701 (2007)
3. Desbois, D.: Applying interval PCA and clustering to quantile estimates: empirical distributions 
   of fertilizer cost estimates for yearly crops in European Countries. Communications in Statistics: 
   Case Studies, Data Analysis and Applications, 7(4), 695–716 (2021)






















