Urban Development Paths in Poland: Multidimensional Perspective

Barbara Batóg and Jacek Batóg

The development of countries and regions is strongly dependent on the socioeconomic 
situation characterising the largest urban centres [3]. This is caused not only by a 
higher intensity of processes taking place in urban space, but also by the predominance 
of the population living in cities in comparison to rural areas. The increasing role of 
urban systems in the creation of domestic product and the accumulation of services and 
innovations on their area results in a growing interest in studying the phenomenon of 
urbanisation and concentration of social and economic activities realised in urban 
space [1]. The main objective of the study will be the construction of development paths 
of the largest Polish cities, which are the capitals of a given region, in 2004-2020. 
To achieve it, the authors will use their own methodological proposal from the area of 
multidimensional analysis. An additional aspect of the study will be a comparison of the 
similarity of the changes and levels of development of particular cities with the use of 
selected measures of time series similarity and cluster analysis [2]. The analyses are to 
answer the following research questions: (i) what was the socio-economic development of 
Polish voivodship cities characterised by in the last years, (ii) has this development 
proceeded in a similar way for all analysed cities, and (iii) what has been the impact of 
the last two crises on the dynamics and heterogeneity of development of the analysed cities?

Keywords: cities, development, economic crisis, multivariate analysis, temporal analysis

References
1. Bogdanski M.: Socio-economic potential of Polish cities – a regional dimension, Bull. Geogr.
   Socio. Econ. Ser. 17, 13-20 (2012)
2. Fanni Z., Khakpour B.A., and Heydari A.: Evaluating the regional development of border
   cities by TOPSIS model (case study: Sistan and Baluchistan Province, Iran). Sustain. Cities
   Soc. 10, 80-86 (2014)
3. Zoeteman K., Mommaas H., and Dagevos J.: Are larger cities more sustainable? Lessons from
   integrated sustainability monitoring in 403 Dutch municipalities. Environ. Dev. 17, 57-72
   (2016)






















