Functional Data from Wearable Devices. A Review

Nihan Acar-Denizli and Pedro Delicado

With the recent development of sensor and information technologies, it is more and
more common to collect data obtained from people by sensors or wearable devices
in a continuous an automatic way, to which we refer as wearable device data. Mobile
phones have sensors and accelerometers measuring from the number of steps that
we have walk daily to our instantaneous stress level. In healthcare there are wearable
devices that measure the amount of oxygen in the blood, the electrical activity of the
heart over time and the concentration of glucose in blood. See [2].
  Since wearable device data are usually continuous, time-dependent, and has high
volume, Functional Data Analysis (FDA) are suitable for them. Through an exhaustive 
literature revision, here we explore the possibilities that FDA offers as a generic
methodology for analyzing wearable device data. In particular, we identify relevant
problems in wearable data that can be approached using FDA, and we document open
access datasets that can be used as benchmarks in posterior research on functional
data coming from wearable devices.
  As an example, in [1] data come from a clinical trial evaluating the beneficial
effects of quinoa consumption on prediabetic subjects, which were monitored during
8 weeks with FreeStyle Libre (a sensor applied to the back of the upper arm of subjects
that records the data on glucose concentration every 15 minutes). The glucose values
corresponding to the breakfast (from minute -30’ to +120’) were considered the
functional response in a functional regression model fitted to measure the effect on
glucose curves of diet type (rich in quinoa or not) and nutrient intakes.

Keywords: accelerometer, glucose level curve, remote patient monitoring

References
1. Diaz-Rizzolo, D.A., Acar-Denizli, N., Kostov, B., Roura, E., Siso-Almirall, A., Delicado, P.,
   Gomis, R.: Beneficial effects of quinoa consumption on glycaemia fluctuations: a pilot study
   in old-age prediabetic subjects. Submitted. (2022)
2. Goldsmith, J., Liu, X., Jacobson, J.S., Rundle, A.: New insights into activity patterns in
   children, found using functional data analyses. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc., 48, 1723–1729 (2016).






















