On the Role of Data, Statistics and Decisions in a Pandemic

Ursula Garczarek, Beate Jahn, Sarah Friedrich, Joachim Behnke, Joachim Engel,
Ralf Munnich, Markus Pauly, Adalbert Wilhelm, Olaf Wolkenhauer, Markus Zwick, 
Uwe Siebert, and Tim Friede

A pandemic poses particular challenges to public health decision-making because of
the need to continuously adapt public measures to rapidly changing evidence and data
availability. This presentation provides an overview of the process of decision making
using data in a pandemic and gives recommendations for the different steps from a
statistical perspective. A range of modelling techniques with different goals including
mathematical, statistical and decision-analytic models applied in the COVID-19
context are briefly introduced. We discuss the importance of statistical literacy, and
of effective dissemination and communication of findings.
  One recommendation relates to the need and value of interdisciplinary cooperation. 
Cooperation is central in a pandemic to the society at large, but also specifically
within the field of data science: we should act as a specialist group rather than as
individuals, broadly positioned and media-sensitive. The presentation is based on a
manuscript summarizing the discussion of an interdisciplinary group [1].
  Presenting this topic at the IFCS, we aim to foster the understanding of the goals
of these modelling approaches and the specific data requirements that are essential
for data collection and transformation, the interpretation of results and for successful
interdisciplinary collaborations among statisticians, epidemiologists, public health
experts, social sciences, and ethicists, as well as health decision and communication
scientists.

Keywords: pandemic, modelling, statistical literacy, decision making

References
1. Jahn, B., Friedrich, S., Behnke, J., Engel, J., Garczarek, U., Munnich, R., Pauly, M., 
   Wilhelm, A., Wolkenhauer, O., Zwick, M., Siebert, U., Friede, T: On the role of data, 
   statistics and decisions in a pandemic AStA Adv Stat Anal (forthcoming).
   https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2108.04068






















