Robustified Elastic Net Estimator for Multinomial Regression

Fatma Sevinç Kurnaz and Peter Filzmoser

The elastic net estimator has been proposed in particular for high-dimensional low
sample size data sets [5], and it has been extended to generalized linear regression
models [1]. A fully robust version of the elastic net estimator has been introduced
for linear and logistic regression by [3]. This work is extended to the setting of 
robust multinomial regression. Robustness is achieved by trimming the negative 
log-likelihood function, and by introducing group-wise weights according to the 
outlyingness of the observations. The procedure is implemented in the R package 
enetLTS [4], using internally the R package glmnet [2]. Simulation studies and real 
data examples are conducted to show the performance in comparison to the classical, 
non-robust counterpart for multinomial regression.

The work was supported by grant TUBITAK 2219 from the Scientific and Technological
Research Council of Turkey.

Keywords: elastic net penalty, multinomial regression, robustness, sparsity

References
1. Friedman, J., Hastie, T. and Tibshirani, R.: Regularization paths for generalized 
   linear models via coordinate descent. Journal of Statistical Software, 33, 1–22, 2010.
2. Friedman, J., Hastie, T. and Tibshirani, R., Narasimhan, B., Tay, K., Simon, N., Qian, J. 
   and Yang, J. 2021: glmnet: Lasso and Elastic-Net Regularized Generalized Linear Models, 
   R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. R package version 4.1–3, 
   https://CRAN.Rproject. org/package=glmnet
3. Kurnaz, F.S, Hoffmann, I. and Filzmoser, P.: Robust and sparse estimation methods for 
   high-dimensional linear and logistic regression. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory 
   Systems, 172, 211–222 (2018).
4. Kurnaz, F.S, Hoffmann, I. and Filzmoser, P.: enetLTS: Robust and sparse estimation 
   methods for high-dimensional linear and logistic regression, R Foundation for Statistical 
   Computing, Vienna, Austria. R package, https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=enetLTS
5. Zou, H. and Hastie, T.: Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net, Journal 
   of Royal Statistics Society Series B, 67, 301–320 (2005).