Latent Function-On-Scalar Regression Models for Observed Sequences of Correlated Binary
Data: a Restricted Likelihood Approach

Fatemeh Asgari and Valeria Vitelli

In function-on-scalar regression problems, the response curve is sometimes observed
as a sequence of correlated binary or multilevel data. This kind of situations can be
handled via the family of generalized functional regression models, with several
proposals in this direction already present in the literature [2, 3]. In this talk, we
introduce a functional regression setting where the random response curve is unobserved,
and only its dichotomized version as a sequence of correlated binary data is
observed. We propose a practical computational framework for maximum likelihood
analysis relying on the use of a complete data likelihood, which has the advantages of
scaling to large datasets, and of handling non-equally spaced and missing observations
effectively and flexibly. The proposed method is used in the Function-on-Scalar
regression setting, with the latent response variable being a Gaussian random element
taking values in a separable Hilbert space. We provide smooth estimations for
the functional regression coefficients and principal components by introducing an
adaptive Monte Carlo Expectation Maximization (MCEM) algorithm that circumvents
selecting the smoothing parameters. The novel method is described in details
in [1], where its performance is also demonstrated by simulated and real case studies, 
and is implemented in the R package dfrr.

Keywords: function-on-scalar regression, longitudinal binary data, mcem algorithm

References
1. Asgari, F., Alamatsaz, M.H., Vitelli, V., Hayati, S.: Latent function-on-scalar 
   regression models for observed sequences of binary data: a restricted likelihood approach. 
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.02635.(2020)
2. Goldsmith, J., Zipunnikov, V., Schrack, J.: Generalized multilevel function-on-scalar 
   regression and principal component analysis. Biometrics, 71, 344–353 (2015)
3. Scheipl, F., Gertheiss, J., Greven, S.: Generalized functional additive mixed models. 
   Electron. J. Stat. 10, 1455–1492 (2016)