Consistency of Trimmed Estimators of Scatter under the t-Distribution

Andrea Cerioli, Lucio Barabesi, Luis Angel Garcìa-Escudero, and Agustìn Mayo-Iscar

It is well known that trimmed estimators of multivariate scatter, such as the Minimum
Covariance Determinant (MCD) estimator, are inconsistent unless an appropriate
factor is applied to them in order to take the effect of trimming into account. This
factor is widely recommended and applied when uncontaminated data are assumed
to come from a multivariate Normal model (see, e.g., [4]). We address the problem
of computing a consistency factor for the MCD estimator in a heavy-tail scenario,
when uncontaminated data come from a multivariate Student’s C-distribution. The
multivariate C-distribution has a representation as an infinite mixture o fNormals with
scales depending on Gamma distribution. This representation allows estimation of
the C-distribution parameters by using algorithms in the EM family. Additionally,
the required consistency factor for trimmed estimators of multivariate scatter, such
as the MCD, can be obtained through the corresponding consistency factors defined
under the Normal model. We compare results from this mixture-based approach to
analytical derivation of consistency factors that follows from the functional 
representation of the MCD [2]. We also consider implications for outlier detection [1] 
and robust clustering [3].

Keywords: consistency factor, em algorithm, mcd, robust distance

References
1. Cerioli, A.: Multivariate Outlier Detection With High-Breakdown Estimators. J. Am. Stat.
   Assoc. 105, 147–156 (2010)
2. Croux, C., Haesbroeck, G.: Influence Function and Efficiency of the Minimum Covariance
   Determinant Scatter Matrix Estimator. J. Multivar. Anal. 71, 161–190 (1999)
3. Dotto, F., Farcomeni, A., Garcìa-Escudero, L.A., Mayo-Iscar, A.: A reweighting approach 
   to robust clustering. Stat. Comp. 28, 477–493 (2018)
4. Hubert, M., Debruyne, M., Rousseeuw, P.J.: Minimum covariance determinant and extensions.
   WIREs Comput Stat. 10, e1421 (2018)