Biplots: A Sophisticated Multivariate Approach or a User-Friendly Technique?

M. Rui Alves

Predictive biplots are based on the visualization of the results of multivariate analyses
through the relations between the objects and the original variables equipped with
measuring scales, avoiding the interpretation of latent variables, making them a
useful tool for non-statisticians. However, to achieve this desideratum, biplots need
to be automatically simplified as is commonly done with any multivariate analysis.
Through the definition of an axis mean standard predictive error (mspe), which
evaluates the error that is made by the analyst when reading a biplot axis, it is
possible to automatically select the axes to be included in the biplots, to define the
number of dimensions necessary to conveniently describe any given problem, to
enable the evaluation of outliers and avoid common overestimations. A series of
"AutoBiplot" functions have been written in R to produce PCA [1] and CCA [2]
biplots and can be easily adjusted to many other multivariate analyses [3]. Apparently
forgotten, interpolative biplots can be used in laboratory practical work, and can be
automatically produced following a similar strategy, based on the definition of an
overall standard interpolative error (osie).
Although the techniques for the automatic production of biplots are available, a
wide use of biplots is still restricted mainly to statisticians. Therefore, a good way
to commemorate fifty years of biplots may be to envisage ways of rendering these
methods available to any person needing to apply multivariate analysis.

Keywords: biplots, multivariate, autobiplots

References
1. Alves, M. R.: Evaluation of the predictive power of biplot axes to automate the construction 
   and layout of biplots based on the accuracy of direct readings from common outputs of 
   multivariate analyses: 1. application to principal component analysis. J. Chem., 26(5), 180–190 
   (2012)
2. Alves, M.R.: Getting full control of canonical correlation analysis with the AutoBiplot.CCA
   function. AIP Conference Proceedings 1738, 370015 (2016);
3. Barbosa, C., Oliveira, M. B., Alves, M. R.: Chemometrics in food authentication. In: Oliveira, B., 
   Mafra, I., Amaral, J. (eds) Current topics on food authentication, pp. 237-268. Transworld
   Research Network, Kerala, India (2011).