Comparison of survival prediction models for pancreatic cancer: Cox model vs. machine
learning models

Hyunsuk Kim, Taesung Park and Seungyeoun Lee

A survival prediction model has been recently developed to evaluate the prognosis
of nonmetastatic resected pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) based on a Cox
model using two nationwide database: Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results
(SEER) and Korea Tumor Registry System-Biliary Pancreas (KOTUS-BP). In this
study, we applied the two machine learning methods such as random survival forests
(RSF) and support vector machines (SVMs) for survival analysis, and compared
the prediction performance with the Cox model, RSF and SVMs using SEER and
KOTUS-BP datasets. For the model development and evaluation, three different
schemes were conducted. First, we utilized data from SEER for model development
and used data from KOTUS-BP for external evaluation. Secondly, these two datasets
were swapped by taking data from KOTUS-BP for model development and data from
SEER for external evaluation. Finally, we mixed these two datasets half and half and
utilized the mixed datasets as either a model development or a validation. We used
9,624 patients from SEER and 3,281 patients from KOTUS-BP for constructing a
prediction model and only seven covariates including age, sex, histologic differentiation, 
adjuvant treatment, resection margin status, AJCC 8th T-stage and N-stage were
utilized due to the difference between sets of covariates in two datasets. Comparing
the three schemes for constructing survival prediction models, the performance of
Cox model, RSF and SVM is better when using mixed dataset rather than when
using unmixed dataset. When using mixed dataset, the C-index, 1-year, 2-year, and
3-year time-dependent AUCs for the Cox model were 0.644, 0.698, 0.680, and 0.687,
respectively. Similarly, the C-index, 1-year, 2-year, and 3-year time-dependent AUCs
for RSF were 0.634, 0.682, 0.668, and 0.678, respectively while those for SVM were
0.623, 0.685, 0.635, and 0.626, respectively. In conclusion, the Cox model performs
slightly better than the two machine learning methods such as RSF and SVM. This
is probably because only seven clinical variables were available for constructing the
prediction model.

Keywords: Cox midel, random survival forest, support vector machines
