Robust Classification in High Dimensions Using Regularized Covariance Estimates

Valentin Todorov and Peter Filzmoser

High-dimensional highly correlated data exist in many application domains which
requires the development of appropriate statistical methods. The classical classification
methods like LDA and QDA become practically useless in such a setting because
they will suffer from the singularity problem if the number of observed variables p
exceeds the number of observations n. Numerous regularization techniques with the
purpose to stabilize the classifier and achieve an improved classification performance
have been developed and there exist several studies comparing various regularization
techniques trying to facilitate the choice of a method. However, these methods are
vulnerable to the presence of outlying observations (outliers) in the training data set
which can influence the obtained classification rules and make the results unreliable.
On the other hand, the high breakdown versions of discriminant analysis proposed in
the literature, like [3] do not work or are not reliable in high dimensions. We propose
to utilize the recently introduced regularized versions of the minimum covariance
determinant (MCD) estimator - the regularized MCD (RMCD) estimator [2] and
the minimum regularized covariance determinant (MRCD) estimator [1] to define
the robust discriminant rules which will combine high robustness to outliers with
applicability in high dimensions. The computations can be done with the R package
rrcov available at CRAN. Simulated and real data examples show that the proposed
methods perform better than the existing ones in a wide range of settings.

Keywords: regularization, high-dimensional classification, robust covariance estimation

References
1. Boudt, K., Rousseeuw, P.J., Vanduffel, S., Verdonck, T.: The minimum regularized 
   covariance determinant estimator. Statistics and Computing 30(1), 113–128 (2020).
2. Croux, C., Gelper, S., Haesbroeck, G.: Regularized minimum covariance determinant 
   estimator. Technical report, Mimeo New York (2012).
3. Hubert, M., Van Driessen, K.: Fast and Robust Discriminant Analysis. Computational 
   Statistics & Data Analysis 45, 301–320 (2004).