Clusters Based on Prediction Accuracy of Global Forecasting Models

Pablo Montero-Manso, Ángel López-Oriona, and José A. Vilar

In the context of model-based time series clustering, the quality of a given clustering
relies on the predictive accuracy of the models that generated the cluster. Traditionally,
a model is fitted to each time series and then a dissimilarity matrix is generated
from distances between models. This approach has a few limitations. Time series
are notoriously difficult to fit, exhibiting problems such temporal dependency, low
sample size and nonstationarity. Moreover, when clustering a large number time
series, we often have to rely on automatic fitting procedures without human supervision.
These problems lead to models with poor predictive accuracy. However, a
new paradigm has emerged in time series prediction, the so-called cross-learning or
global model approach. A group of time series is pooled together and fitted with a
single model, called a ‘global’ model, and a single predictive function is then used
for all of the time series in the group. Global models are showing superior accuracy
compared with traditional single-series (or ‘local’) models in a vast number of
applications. Global models can be used for clustering, by finding a grouping that
maximizes the predictive accuracy of the global models fitted to each group. This
approach has an important side-effect, it introduces the conceptof predictive accuracy
as a measure of a cluster quality: given a model class and a dataset,the quality
of a given clustering is the average predictive error of the global. This measure also
serves to select the often unknown parameter of the number of clusters.
In this talk, we will introduce the idea of using global models for clustering time
series, showcasing several algorithms and results on simulation and real datasets.
The time series models include the classical linear autoregressive family, but also
neural networks and decision trees. Finally, we will draw connections between global
models and classic algorithms such as k-means and discuss implicit limitations of
the approach.

Keywords: clustering, time series, global models, data pooling, autoregression