Visualization of IATA Regions in Air Transport Before and After the COVID-19 Pandemic

Tüzün Tolga İnan, Neslihan Gökmen İnan, Aylin Yaman Kocadağlı, and Ozan Kocadağlı

COVID-19 Pandemic has affected all transport modules including air passenger
transportation (ATP) as an unprecedented global crisis. This study aims to visualize
the position of International Air Transport Association (IATA) Regions considering
some important key indicators such as gross domestic product, human development index, 
tourism arrival, national and international ATP numbers [1]. Also, this study deals with 
revealing out the negative impact of this global crisis on ATP during COVID-19 Pandemic 
between 2019-2021. In this study, to analyze ATP, three common airline metrics were gathered 
to figure out significant factors that lead to similarities between regions in terms of global 
crisis’s negative impact for each year. Factor analysis (FA) and multidimensional scaling (MDS) 
were applied to IATA dataset [2]. MDS has brought out some substantial inferences. For instance, 
Europe, North and Latin America have similarities in positively, whereas Africa, Asia Pacific
and Middle East show these similarities negatively since they are located close to each other. 
The location of regions has changed due to COVID-19 Pandemic compared to 2019 in MDS. 
Thus, ATP recovery is better in the Middle East compared to Africa and the Asia Pacific; however, 
this recovery circulation seems far from being adequate when compared to others. To sum up, these 
findings may help aviators to manage the strategic perspective of ATP more professionally.

Keywords: covid-19 pandemic, air passenger transportation, strategic perspective

References
1. Scholl, W., Schermuly, C.C.: The impact of culture on corruption, gross domestic product,
   and human development. Journal of Business Ethics 163(1), 171–189 (2020)
2. Nyoja, E.T., Ragab, M.R.: Economic Impacts of Public Air Transport Investment: A Case
   Study of Egypt. Sustainability 14(5), 2651 (2022)