Comparison of Pixel Based Segmentation Methods in Papillary Thyroid US Images

Neslihan Gökmen İnan, İsmail Meşe, Düzgün Yıldırım, and Ozan Kocadağlı

Thyroid nodules are one of the endocrine diseases caused by abnormal growth of
cells. Ultrasonography (US) is an efficient tool that is routinely used to identify these
nodules. Thyroid nodule segmentation on US images is a valuable and, it has a great
importance for the diagnosis of thyroid cancer. Despite US imaging is considered as
the best option, the high incidence rate increases the burden of radiologists in terms
of diagnosing the thyroid cancer cases at early stages and their levels [1]. In such a
case, the contour and region-based segmentation methods have a potential to extract
some important features called as biomarkers which allow radiologists to make more
accurate diagnosis. In this context, this study aims to compare the contour and regionbased 
segmentation methods with respect to the feature extraction performance. In
this study, US images of 187 papillary carcinoma patients were analyzed. The image
segmentation quality was evaluated with respect to dice coefficient measurement and
ROC analysis results such as TN, FP, AUC, g-score, f-measure [2]. Also, the validity
of the pixel-based methods were achieved with the extracted features obtained from
the manual segmentation methods performed by expert radiologists. The analysis
results showed that the automatic segmentation methods are superior performance
to the manual ones according to the various statistical performance criteria.

Keywords: thyroid us image, pixel-based segmentation, papillary carcinoma

References
1. Chen, J., You, H., Li, K. : A review of thyroid gland segmentation and thyroid nodule
   segmentation methods for medical ultrasound images. Computer methods and programs in
   biomedicine. 185, 105329 (2020)
2. Koundal, D., Gupta, S., Singh, S. : Computer aided thyroid nodule detection system using
   medical ultrasound images. CBiomedical Signal Processing and Control. 40, 117-130 (2018)