Symbolic Concordance and Discordance Illustrated on Data from an International
Teaching and Learning Survey

Simona Korenjak-Černe, Barbara Japelj Pavešić, and Edwin Diday

A "similarity" as a "concordance" in data analysis represents mathematical modeling
of the common words "similarity" and "concordance" used in our natural language.
The similarity between a class c and a collection P of classes c’ for a category x is
high if the mean of the similarities between the frequency of x in c and the frequency
of x in c’ that varies in P is high. A class has high concordance with a given collection
of classes for a category x if that category is frequent in that class and if, in addition,
there are numerous classes in the given collection of classes for which the category
x is also frequent. Similarity and concordance thus express two different kinds of
knowledge. In this presentation, we introduce some measures of concordance and
discordance between a class and a given collection of classes that fall within the
framework of symbolic data analysis (SDA) [1].
We will illustrate the use of new measures on the real dataset from the international
large-scale assessment PIRLS 2016 [2] that measured the achievement of students
in classical reading and reading from digital devices in more than 50 countries.
Online reading is becoming an extremely important skill for younger generations and
research is needed to understand how it develops along with classical reading from
paper. We will study distributions of high and low-achieving students in informational
reading from paper and online reading, and compare these across countries and
within teachers of classes of students inside a specific country. For example, if we
consider the teacher as a class and his or her students as individuals, by examining
their reading ability, we can measure the concordance or discordance between the
teacher’s student responses of a country and the other countries.

Keywords: symbolic data analysis, symbolic concordance, symbolic discordance

References
1. Diday, E.: Explanatory tools for machine learning in the symbolic data analysis framework.
   In: Diday, E., Guan, R., Saporta, G., Wang, H. (eds.) Advances in Data Science, pp. 3-30.
   ISTE-Wiley (2020)
2. PIRLS: Progress in Internationals Readings Literacys Study
   https://timssandpirls.bc.edu/pirls2016
