Fifty Years of Biplots: Some Remaining Enigmas and Challenges

Jan Graffelman

Biplots have found applications in many fields of science, where they are often used
to detect groups, outliers or other regularities in multivariate data. A recent search
at the web of science (using the core collection) reveals there are well over 2,200
scientific articles that refer to biplots since the term was first coined by Gabriel [1].
Several textbooks on biplots are available with a varying level of mathematical depth,
though classical textbooks on multivariate analysis have been slow at incorporating
the concept, or at recognising its universal value for all classical methods that are
based on the singular value decomposition.
  In applied scientific studies, several aspects of biplot construction and interpretation 
are still not well understood, to the point that it is easy to find a poor biplot
in a high-impact scientific journal. Some of the more problematic aspects will be
addressed in the talk and concern: the choice of the multivariate method, aspect ratio, 
biplot scaling, interpretation rules and (sub)optimality of approximations among
others. There is a lot of software available for making biplots, but in spite of this, the
truth is that many users would not be able to make an optimal biplot for representing
one of the most elementary matrices: the correlation matrix.
  The growing size of datasets being analysed poses an important challenge to
biplot methodology. For example, by 2015 the 1,000 genomes project contained
information on 88 million genetic polymorphisms for over 2,500 human individuals,
obviously impossible to sensibly represent in a single biplot. In this situation, cases
and variables are finally often presented in separate plots, thereby sacrificing the
biplot’s most appealing feature: its ability to jointly represent and interpret observations 
and variables. We address some examples in the high-dimensional context,
where biplots are too dense, often have low goodness-of-fit, and where aggregation,
clustering or filtering are needed to make their application feasible.

Keywords: biplot, singular value decomposition, high-dimensional data

References
1. Gabriel, K.R.: The biplot graphic display of matrices with application to principal 
   component analysis. Biometrika. 58(3), 453–467 (1971)

