Industry Sector Detection in Legal Articles Using Transformer-Based Deep Learning

Hui Yang, Stella Hadjiantoni, Yunfei Long, Ruta Petraitytè, and Berthold Lausen

Industry analysis, which identifies multiple industry sectors hidden in massive legal
texts, could benefit greatly to business activities of legal professions such as 
improving customer services by detecting overall industry trends across legal topics.
However, manual industry labeling on enormous legal information will be expensive and 
time-consuming. This research investigated an AI-powered approach to
automatically recognise industry sectors using transformer-based deep learning [1]
which had shown advantages on a set of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks
recent years. In this study, a dataset consisting of over 1,700 annotated legal articles
was curated for the identification of six industry sectors. Two main research questions 
will be answered by the outcome of our work: (1) Like other NLP tasks that
mostly focus on the analysis at word token or sentence level, do transformer models
also perform well on the full-text articles? (2) Compared with large-scale general
domain data, could transformer models work effectively on a small legal-specific
domain dataset? Our experimental results showed that the transformer-based predictive 
models achieved the F1 scores ranged between 0.73 and 0.83 on the detection of
the six industry sectors. When the word sequence length was increased to 1,024 or
2,048 words, the performance got slight worse compared with that of the relatively
short word sequences (e.g., 512). The research results suggested that transformer
models are sensitive to the data size, text structure, and domain area to some extent.

Keywords: industry sector detection, text classification, transformer models

References
1. Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: BERT: pre-training of deep 
   bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In: Proceedings of the 
   NAACL-HLT 2019 Conference, pp. 4171-86. Minnesota (2019)


