A Topological Clustering of Individuals

Rafik Abdesselam

The clustering of objects-individuals is one of the most widely used approaches to
exploring multidimensional data. The two common unsupervised clustering strategies 
are Hierarchical Ascending Clustering (HAC) and k-means partitioning used to
identify groups of similar objects in a dataset to divide it into homogeneous groups.
The proposed Topological Clustering of Individuals, or TCI, studies a homogeneous
set of individuals-rows of a data table, based on the notion of neighborhood graphs;
the columns-variables are more-or-less correlated or linked according to whether
the variable is of a quantitative or qualitative type. It enables topological analysis
of the clustering of individual variables which can be quantitative, qualitative or a
mixture of the two. It first analyzes the correlations or associations observed between
the variables in the topological context of principal component analysis (PCA) or
multiple correspondence analysis (MCA), depending on the type of variable, then
classifies individuals into homogeneous groups relative to the structure of the variables 
considered. The proposed TCI method is presented and illustrated here using a simple real 
dataset with quantitative variables; however, it can also be applied with qualitative or 
mixed variables.

Keywords: hierarchical clustering, proximity measure, neighborhood graph, adjacency matrix, 
          multivariate data analysis

References
1. Abdesselam, R.: A Topological Principal Component Analysis. International Journal of Data
   Science and Analysis. Vol.7, Issue 2, 20–31 (2021)
2. Batagelj, V., Bren, M.: Comparing resemblance measures. Journal of classification, 12, 
   73–90 (1995)
3. Lesot, M.J., Rifqi, M. and Benhadda, H.: Similarity measures for binary and numerical data:
   a survey. In: IJKESDP, 1, 1, 63-84 (2009)
4. Panagopoulos, D.: Topological data analysis and clustering. Chapter for a book, Algebraic
   Topology (math.AT) arXiv:2201.09054, Machine Learning, (2022)
5. Zighed, D., Abdesselam, R., and Hadgu, A.: Topological comparisons of proximity measures.
   In: Tan et al. (Eds). 16th PAKDD 2012 Conference, pp. 379–391. Springer, (2012)

