Divide and Conquer: a Clustering Method for Hierarchical and Nested Data Structures

Andrej Svetlošák, Miguel de Carvalho, Gabriel Martos Venturini, and Raffaella Calabrese

Joint clustering on data with nested or hierarchical structures can be challenging.
Results obtained by similarity-based methods (i.e. via K-means and K-medoids)
often do not reflect the structure of the data, while model-based clustering (i.e. via
mixture models), as we show, likely to leads to the same number of components
on each margin, i.e. same number of groups on each level of the hierarchy. We
address these drawbacks of joint models by proposing a novel approach for cluster 
analysis—to which we refer to as divide and conquer clustering—that lies on
the interface between model-based clustering and similarity-based clustering. The
approach consists of three steps and provides interpretable cluster solutions while
allowing differing number of components on the margins. We achieve this by first
estimating the margins of each hierarchy level by recently introduced non-local prior
mixtures, which have the advantage of treating the number of components as a model
parameter. Secondly, we learn about a set of joint clusters (proto clusters) that are
obtained via a Voronoi tessellation on the product space of the marginal component means. 
Finally, the final joint clusters are the Voronoi faces centred at local
density maxima of the joint distribution. These are obtained by dividing up proto
clusters with a density below a threshold between the remaining Voronoi faces. In
this sense the high density areas divide and conquer low density regions. We analyse
and compare the performance of our method with selected state of the art clustering
methods. The results on both simulated data and real datasets suggest an on par or
better performance than competing methods.

Keywords: cluster analysis, model-based clustering, similarity-based clustering,
          non-local priors, hierarchical and nested data structures


