Off-Target Predictions in CRISPR-Cas9 Gene Editing Using Machine Learning

Ali Mertcan Kose and Ozan Kocadagli

Recently, CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeated)
applications widely appear in gene editing for treatment of cancer. Therefore,
CRISPR Cas-9 system is a robust method for effectively editing the genome of
cell. CRISPR locus is composed of DNA in genes located on cell. DNA/Target 
sequence occurs 23 endonucleases. Off/on-target sequence are diagnosed with 
matching between endonucleases and Guide RNA. The prediction of off-target mutations
in CRISPR-Cas9 is a hot topic because of its relevance to gene editing research.
In literature, Off/on target levels are often evaluated by CFD/MIT scores in terms
of binary classification. Instead of those scores, determining more than 2 classes
by the latent class analysis (LCA) in the pre-processing step helps to interpret, and
classify more accurately. In this study, a benchmark dataset that consists of Human
(Homo-sapiens) - (GRCh37/hg19) + SNPs: 10000 Genomes, ExaC was used. In the
analysis, LCA produced three significant classes related to the off-target scores over
benchmark dataset. These classes are identified as high (7.1%), middle (86.5%),
low (6.4%). Afterwards, the estimated off-target scores were modeled by machine
learning methods such as Xgboost, SVM, ANN and decision trees etc. where the
benchmark dataset was partitioned by 10-fold cross-validation procedure. 
The analysis results figure out the effect of locus structures and mismatching positions 
on the off-target. The best model is Xgboost with accuracy (AUC=100%).

Keywords: latent class analysis, machine learning, crispr, off target scoring

References
1. Kang, S.H., Lee, W. jae, An, J.H., Lee, J.H., Kim, Y.H., Kim, H., . . . Lee, S. H. : 
   Predictionbased highly sensitive CRISPR off-target validation using target-specific 
   DNA enrichment. Nat Commun. 11(1), 1–11 (2020)
2. Leibowitz, M.L., Papathanasiou, S., Doerfler, P.A., Blaine, L.J., Sun, L., Yao, Y., . . . 
   Pellman, D.: Chromothripsis as an on-target consequence of CRISPR–Cas9 genome editing. 
   Nat Genet. 53(6), 895–905 (2021)

