Multivariate Time Series Feature Extraction via Multilayer Networks

"Vanessa Freitas" Silva, "Maria Eduarda" Silva, Pedro Ribeiro, and Fernando Silva

The extraction of features from time-indexed data has proved to be an important
preliminary task in many applications of time series analysis, such as classification, 
clustering and forecasting. Finding a set of features that summarizes the main
characteristics of such data is therefore a crucial task, which usually involves conventional 
statistical and non-linear measures of time series analysis [1]. Complementary, features based 
on complex network methods have been shown to be useful to characterize time series data [2, 3]. 
For multivariate time series (MTS) settings, feature extraction is even less trivial due to 
temporal and cross-dimension dependencies. The existing methods and models are often developed 
under certain constraints and for specific problems, and therefore new methodological and 
computational tools are required. Multilayer networks are complete structures able of mapping the 
internal and external temporal dependencies of MTS through intra and inter-network connections [2]. 
In this work, we introduce novel MTS features based on a new multilayer visibility network mapping 
method. To demonstrate its applicability, we performed a MTS clustering task based on the proposed 
features set.

Keywords: multivariate, time series, visibility graphs, feature extraction

Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge support from FCT (SFRH/BD/139630/2018)
                 and PREFERENTIAL (PTDC/MAT-STA/28243/2017).

References
1. Montero-Manso, P., Athanasopoulos, G., Hyndman, R.J., Talagala, T.S.: FFORMA: Feature
   based forecast model averaging. Int. J. Forecast. 36, 86–92 (2020)
2. Silva, V.F., Silva, M.E., Ribeiro, P., Silva, F.: Time series analysis via network science:
   Concepts and algorithms. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 11, e1404 (2021)
3. Silva, V.F., Silva, M.E., Ribeiro, P., Silva, F.: Novel features for time series analysis: 
   a complex networks approach. Data Min. Knowl. Disc. (2022)























