Is It Hate or Criticism? An Exploratory Approach to Negative Comments on YouTube

Manuela Schmidt

As many communities on YouTube develop around controversial topics, marginalized 
identities, and extreme ideological positions, negative, anti-social or hateful
commenting behavior on YouTube has garnered increasing interest. Whereas previous 
studies analyze these comments by sentiment analysis or use of profanity only,
in this exploratory approach, the analysis of negative comments on YouTube is 
expanded on by combining sentiment analysis [1], a dictionary approach for defining
and matching video topics using automatically generated transcripts, a dictionary
matching for swear words [2], and video and comment metadata. A small group of
content creators was selected for the analysis.
  The combination of comment sentiment, the relation to a video and use of profanity 
allowed for the classification into four groups of different sizes: Impoliteness,
Incivility, Flaming and Criticism [3].
  Comparing approaches, sentiment analysis alone shows a similar prevalence of
negative comments between creators. When the classification is applied, a different
distribution of negative groups between the creators is observable along expectations.
The frequency, commonality, and difference of the language used show that while
the groups share multiple expressions, especially those carrying a negative sentiment
value, they make distinct use of crucial terms. While this classification is valuable
for gaining insight and nuance into negative comments, some applicability issues for
larger studies will also be discussed.

Keywords: text mining, social science, social media, sentiment analysis

References
1. Thelwall, M., Buckley, K., Paltoglou, G.: Sentiment strength detection for the social web.
   Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 63(1), 163—173
   (2012)
2. Dumm, S., Niekler, A. Methoden, Qualitätssicherung und Forschungsdesign. In M. Lemke,
   G. Wiedemann (eds.), Text Mining in den Sozialwissenschaften, pp. 89–116. Springer VS,
   Wiesbaden (2015)
3. Barnes, R. Uncovering Online Commenting Culture: Trolls, Fanboys and Lurkers. Palgrave
   Macmillan, Cham (2018)


