The Control of False Discovery Rate for Functional Data

Niels Lundtorp Olsen, Alessia Pini, and Simone Vantini

In functional data analysis (FDA), the object of statistical methods are functions,
which are typically modeled as random elements of a Hilbert space. In this framework 
inference is particularly challenging, since it deals with elements of infinite
dimensional spaces. A popular topic in FDA is local inference, i.e., the continuous
statistical testing of a null hypothesis along the domain. The principal issue in this
topic is the infinite amount of tested hypotheses, which can be seen as an extreme
case of multiple comparisons problem. Local inferential techniques are either based
on simultaneous confidence bands, or on the definition of a p-value function, which
provides a p-value at each point of the domain, guaranteeing a control of a quantity
related with the error rate on the whole domain. In this work we focus on this second
line, and in particular on the control of the false discovery rate (FDR), which is the
expected proportion of false discoveries (rejected null hypotheses) among all discoveries, 
and was first introduced in the seminal paper by Benjamini and Hochberg [1]. We define FDR 
in the setting of functional data defined on a manifold domain.
  We then introduce the functional Benjamini-Hochberg (fBH) procedure: a procedure
able to control the previously defined functional FDR. Finally, the fBH procedure
is applied to the analysis of daily temperatures on Earth. All details about the fBH
procedure are reported in [2].

Keywords: benjamini-hochberg procedure, multiple comparisons, null hypothesis testing, 
          local inference

References
1. Benjamini, Y., Hochberg, Y.: Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and Powerful
   Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 57 (1) 289–300
   (1995) doi: 10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x
2. Lundtorp Olsen, N., Pini, A., Vantini, S.: False discovery rate for functional data. Test (2021)


