A Time-Varying Text Based Ideal Point Model to Infer Partisanship in the U.S. Senate

Sourav Adhikari, Bettina Grün, and Paul Hofmarcher

Ideal point models analyze lawmakers’ votes, speeches, press statements and social
media posts to quantify their political positions along a latent continuum. In this
work, we extend the text based ideal point model [3] to obtain a time-varying version
to study the evolution of the ideological positions of lawmakers over time and assess
the change in partisanship among representatives from two political parties. We
aim to confirm recent findings regarding the increase in partisanship manifested in
speeches by Republicans and Democrats in the U.S. Senate during the last years
[2]. These findings were drawn using a penalized estimator for measuring group
differences in choices with high-dimensional data and text analysis was based on
manually pre-defined topics. By contrast, the time-varying text based ideal point
model estimated using variational inference [1] infers topics in a data-driven way
and does not use party membership to determine the ideological positions and thus
is not susceptible to overrating spurious differences in vocabulary use of different
party members. Drawing the same substantive conclusions based on the results of
two different statistical text analysis methods provides evidence for their robustness.

Keywords: high-dimensional data, text mining, topic model, variational techniques

References
1. Blei, D., Kucukelbir, D., McAuliffe, J. D.: Variational inference: A review for 
   statisticians. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 112, 859–877 (2017)
2. Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J.M., Taddy, M.: Measuring group differences in high-dimensional
   choices: Method and application to congressional speech. Econometrica. 87 1307–1340 (2019)
3. Vafa, K., Naidu, S., Blei, D.: Text based ideal points. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual
   Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 5345–5357 (2020)

