Uncovering Regions of Maximum Dissimilarity on Random Process Data

Miguel de Carvalho and Gabriel Martos

Everyday millions of data patterns flow around the world at unprecedented speed,
thus leading to an explosion on the demand for modeling stochastic process data—
such as time series, point processes, and functional data; each of these types of data
plays a key role in machine learning, as can be seen, for instance, from the recent
papers of [1], [2], and [3]. Hand in hand with this shock on demand arrived a pressing
need for the development of data-intensive methods, techniques, and algorithms for
learning and comparing random processes.
In this talk, I will propose a statistical method that learns about regions with a
certain volume, where the marginal attributes of two processes are less similar. The
proposed methods are devised in full generality for the setting where the data of
interest are themselves stochastic processes, and thus the proposed method can be
used for pointing out the regions of maximum dissimilarity with a certain volume,
in the contexts of functional data, time series, and point processes. The parameter
functions underlying both stochastic processes of interest are modeled via a basis
representation, and Bayesian inference is conducted via an integrated nested Laplace
approximation. The numerical studies validate the proposed methods, and we showcase 
their application with case studies on criminology, finance, and medicine.

Keywords: functional parameters, multi-objective optimization, pairs of random processes, 
          Kolmogorov metric, set function optimization, Youden J statistic

References
1. José R Berrendero, Beatriz Bueno-Larraz, and Antonio Cuevas. On Mahalanobis distance in
   functional settings. J. Machine Learning Res., 21(9)cl, 1–33 (2020).
2. Johann Faouzi and Hicham Janati. pyts: A python package for time series classification. J.
   Machine Learning Res., 21(46), 1–6 (2020).
3. Ganggang Xu, Ming Wang, Jiangze Bian, Hui Huang, Timothy R. Burch, Sandro C. Andrade,
   Jingfei Zhang, and Yongtao Guan. Semi-parametric learning of structured temporal point
   processes. J. Machine Learning Res., 21(192), 1–39 (2020).

