Bootstrapping Binary GEV Regressions for Massive Unbalanced Datasets

Michele La Rocca, Marcella Niglio, and Marialuisa Restaino

Research on rare events is constantly increasing over the years in many research areas.
Examples include fraud detection, credit default prediction, bankruptcy prediction,
customer/students churn predictions and accident occurrence. In all these cases, rare
events data are usually defined as binary variables with fewer events (ones) than
non-events (zeros). In other words, the degree of unbalance is more extreme in rare
events than it is in the class of unbalanced data. However, both unbalanced and
rare events data have been studied as statistical problems with possible applications
in different fields such as biology, political science, engineering, economics and
medicine. The unbalanced variables related to rare events are difficult to predict and
explain, specially in high dimensional settings and in presence of massive datasets,
where unbalancing might be even more critical.
  The logistic model may not be appropriate for such data since it strongly underestimates 
the probability of rare events because the estimators tend to be biased
towards the majority class, which is usually less critical. Moreover, as underlined in
the literature, the bias of the maximum likelihood estimators of logistic regression
parameters in small sample sizes could be amplified in a rare events context. Thus,
in this framework, there is an increasing interest in using the quantile function of the
GEV distribution as a link function to investigate the relationship between the binary
response variable and a set of predictors. The main advantage of this approach is
that thanks to its skewness, the GEV link function has an asymmetric behaviour. It
approaches one slower than it approaches zero, handling nicely rare events.
  This work aims to estimate the probability of success given a set of features
by using a generalized extreme value regression model for binary data, also taking
into account the effects on the response variable of class imbalance in categorical
predictors. Confidence intervals and hypothesis testing are constructed by using
bootstrap methods, specifically designed for massive datasets, in multiple testing
perspectives. The performance of our proposed procedure is evaluated by Monte
Carlo simulation studies and applications to real datasets.

Keywords: rare events data, GEV regression, bootstrap, multiple testing

