Clustering Count Data Using Compositional Methods

Marc Comas-Cufí, Josep A. Martín-Fernández, Glòria Mateu-Figueras, and
J. Palarea-Albaladejo

Multivariate count data are multivariate vectors of non-negative integers. When
the total number of counts depends on varying external factors (e.g. duration of the
counting process or ability to measure a count), the relative magnitude of the observed
values is of special importance. These data are called point-counting data in some
applied fields, and they are affected by compositional variability and multinomial
counting uncertainties [4]. For clustering analysis purposes, it is crucial to consider
both sources of variability. Compositional variability is commonly modeled using
the Dirichlet or the logratio-normal distribution, leading respectively to the classical
Dirichlet-multinomial distribution and the logratio-normal-multinomial (LRNM)
distribution [2]. In model-based clustering, these models are usually included as
components in a finite mixture model [1,3].
  In this contribution, we propose a fast approach for clustering analysis of pointcounting 
data based on the LRNM model. A part of the procedure takes care of the
compositional aspect through logratio coordinates, including the treatment of zero
counts as necessary. Moreover, through the computation of the posterior distribution
conditioned to the measured variability and the observed data, the multinomial
variability is accounted for by using simulated samples of the latent compositional
process. These samples are combined into a final partition of the original sample by
using clustering ensembling methods. We will illustrate our proposal using different
datasets.

Keywords: multivariate count data, clustering, compositional data analysis

References
1. Comas-Cufí, M., Martín-Fernández, J.A., Mateu-Figueras, G. and Palarea-Albaladejo, J.:
   Model-based clustering of count data based on the logistic-normal-multinomial distribution.
   2017 International Federation of Classification Societies Conference, Tokyo, Japan (2017)
2. Comas-Cufí, M., Martín-Fernández, J.A., Mateu-Figueras, G. and Palarea-Albaladejo, J.:
   Modelling count data using the logratio-normal-multinomial distribution. SORT 44(1), 
   99–126 (2020)
3. Fang, Y. and Subedi, S.: Clustering microbiome data using mixtures of logistic normal 
   multinomial models. arXiv preprint: 2011.06682 (2020)
4. Vermeesch, P.: Statistical models for point-counting data. Earth and Planetary Science Letters
   501, 112–118 (2018)

