Comparing Variable Selection Methods for High-Dimensional Compositional Data in a
Discriminant Analysis Context

P. Daunis-i-Estadella, Glòria Mateu-Figueras, V. Nesrstová, K. Hron, and Josep A. Martín-Fernández

Orthonormal logratio coordinates are used for statistical analysis of compositions.
Although there is an infinite number of potential orthonormal bases, using the
Principal balances (PB) algorithms a specific basis is constructed for maximizing
the retained variance [3]. PB can be used for selecting some parts in order to reduce
the data dimension. This is particularly important in the context of high-dimensional
compositional data (CoDa), such as omic data (genomic, proteomic or metabolomic)
where the identification of biomarkers that allow to discriminate disease has great
interest. This work focuses on the comparison of different proposals for variable
selection in order to apply a discriminant analysis (DA): the Selbal approach [5],
a forward-selection method for the identification of a balance associated with the
variable of interest; the CLR-lasso and CoDa-lasso, a penalised regression approach
[6]; the approaches proposed in [2] based on the index extracted of the variation
matrix and average accuracy using Partial Least Squares (PLS) DA; the stepwise
supervised methods for selecting pairwise logratios [1] and the variable selection in
CoDa using PLS-PB coordinates, a modified procedure consisting in the application
of PLS regression [4]. Simulated data sets and a real data set with the microbiota
associated to the colonic mucosa of patients with different subtypes of inflammatory
bowel disease are used for illustrating the performance of the methods.

Keywords: variable selection, discriminant analysis, principal balances

References
1. Coenders, G., Greenacre, M.: Three approaches to supervised learning for compositional data
   with pairwise logratios. arXiv:2111.08953 [stat.ML] (2021)
2. Filzmoser, P., Hron, K., Templ, M.: Applied compositional data analysis. Springer (2018)
3. Martín-Fernández J.A., Pawlowsky-Glahn, V., Egozcue, J.J., Tolosona-Delgado, R.: Advances
   in principal balances for compositional data. Mathematical Geosciences 50, 273–298 (2018)
4. Nesrstová V, Hron, K., Martín-Fernández J.A, Filzmoser, P., Palarea-Albaladejo, J., Wilms, I.:
   Variable selection in compositional data using PLS-based balance coordinates. Data Science,
   Statistics & Visualisation (DSSV), 7-9 July (2021)
5. Rivera-Pinto J., Egozcue, J.J., Pawlowsky-Glahn, V., Paredes, R., Noguera-Julian, M., Calle,
   M.L.: Balances: a new perspective for microbiome analysis. mSystems 3, e00053-18 (2018)
6. Susin, A., Wang, Y., Lê Cao, K.-A., Calle, M. L.: Variable selection in microbiome compositional 
   data analysis. NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics 2, lqaa029 (2020)
