Cluster Analysis and Genetic Risk Score in Age-Related Macular Degeneration - 
the Coimbra Eye Study

Rita Coimbra

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a complex multifactorial disease
strongly influenced by a combination of genetic and environmental factors and it
is the leading cause of severe vision loss in people over 55 years in developed 
countries. To assess the individual AMD risk, a genetic risk score (GRS) weighted by the
effect size of 52 genetic variants identified by the IAMDGC GWAS was calculated [1]. 
Despite the significantly differences in GRS among controls and AMD cases, it
was not possible to distinguish them based on GRS only.
In this work we explore pathway-specific GRS for the complement system, ARMS2
gene, lipid metabolism and extracellular (ECM) matrix remodelling in a sample of
824 caucasian individuals from the central region of Portugal (Mira) [2]. To explore
whether pathway-based genotype and environmental data can separate AMD subgroups, 
we used k-medoids clustering algorithm with Gower distance. The silhouette
coefficient was used to determine the optimal number of clusters.
Four clusters were identified, with a similar median age and body mass index (BMI)
in each cluster. The cluster with the highest GRS value for the complement system
pathway was cluster 4, for the ARMS2 and the ECM pathways was cluster 2 and
for lipid-based GRS were clusters 2 and 3. Cluster 4 has the highest overall GRS,
strengthening the contribution of the complement system to the AMD genetic risk.
Most severe AMD stages (intermediate and late AMD cases) were more prevalent in
cluster 3. Despite the interesting results and to fully discriminate AMD subgroups,
lifestyle and nutritional contribution should be included in the model.

Keywords: age-related macular degeneration, genetic risk score, clustering

References
1. de Breuk, A. et al: Development of a Genotype Assay for Age-Related Macular Degeneration:
   The EYE-RISK Consortium. Ophthalmology 128(11), 1604-1617 (2021)
2. Farinha, C.V.L., Cachulo, M.L., Alves, D. et al: Incidence of Age-Related Macular Degeneration 
   in the Central Region of Portugal: The Coimbra Eye Study - Report 5. Ophthalmic Res.
   61(4), 226-235 (2019)

