Natural Cubic Smoothing Splines for Latent Class Identification in Longitudinal Growth
Trajectories

Katerina M. Marcoulides and Laura Trinchera

Latent growth curve modeling is regularly used to examine intra-individual changes
over time, inter-individual differences in intra-individual changes over time, as well
as a variety of other intra- and inter-individual disparities over time. In such models,
the growth trajectories are usually modeled as linear functions. However, nonlinear
patterns of change over time are quite common in social and behavioral science
research. Recently Marcoulides and Khojasteh [2] proposed to use natural cubic
smoothing splines to analyze non-linear longitudinal data. This approach has the
main advantage of avoiding knot selection when using splines and avoids imposing
overly restrictive assumptions that other non-linear modeling approaches often require. 
One limitation is that all the sampled individuals in a given longitudinal study
are assumed to rise from a single population. Traditional growth mixture modeling
methods are useful when analyzing such samples with unobserved heterogeneity,
though they still assume the growth trajectories to be the same for all individuals
within a latent class [1]. During our presentation we will discuss a novel approach
that uses derivatives of individual natural cubic smoothing spline functions and then,
following some recent work by Marcoulides and Trinchera [3], applies a hierarchical 
clustering algorithm to group or cluster individuals who follow similar growth
trajectory patterns without requiring to define the number of classes a priori.

Keywords: unobserved heterogeneity, SEM, latent class detection

References
1. Diallo, T. M. O., Morin, A.J.S., Lu, H.: Impact of misspecifications of the latent 
  variancecovariance and residual matrices on the class enumeration accuracy of growth 
  mixture models. Struct. Equ. Model. 23, 507–531 (2016)
2. Marcoulides, K.M., Khojasteh, J.: Analyzing longitudinal data using natural cubic smoothing
   splines. Struct. Equ. Model. 25, 965–971 (2018)
3. Marcoulides, K.M., Trinchera, L.: Detecting unobserved heterogeneity in latent growth curve
   models. Struct. Equ. Model. 26, 390–401 (2018)


