Sensor System for Standardizing Articulation Patterns According to Korean Phonemes

Seong Tak Woo and Da Hee Oh

A sensor system (consisting of approximately 70 channels on an artificial plate) was
established for articulation pattern standardization, and the characteristics of Korean
speech were analyzed. Articulation pattern information was obtained using a sensor
with a group of healthy participants. The measured signals were analyzed using a
bio-signal (tongue contact) processing module and viewer program. Notably, the data
were obtained from only two healthy adults, and certain limitations remain in the
application of data analysis technologies (such as neural network/regression model).
As a preliminary study, we conducted repeated measures analysis of variance to
determine the difference in the closure time and contact area according to the 
utterance unit, meaning, and syllable structure. Specifically, we attempted to determine
the presence of the preceding consonant (C) in two successive consonants (VCCV)
with the same articulation place. Results of experiments demonstrated that the 
articulation sensor and analysis method can be applied to standardize pronunciation
patterns. Although extensive healthy group data and analytical techniques remain to
be identified, the findings can provide insights regarding initial experimental setup
(proposed sensor, acquisition method, etc.) for standardization studies.

Keywords: articulation pattern, tongue strength, analysis of variance, speech therapy, 
          communication disorders

References
1. Dagenais, P.A., Lorendo, L.C., McCutcheon, M.J.: A study of voicing and context effects
   upon consonant linguapalatal contact patterns. Journal of Phonetics 22, 225–238 (1994)
2. Braislin, M.A.G., Cascella, P.W.: A preliminary investigation of the efficacy of oral 
   motor exercises for children with mild articulation disorders. International Journal of 
   Rehabilitation Research 28, 262–266 (2005)




