Google Trends as a Macroeconomic Predictor: Behind the Scenes

"Eduardo Andre" Costa and "Maria Eduarda" Silva

Data sourced from online activities and particularly from Google Trends (GT) has
been gaining importance in the literature as predictors for economic indicators. 
Recent research evidence relationships between GT and a range of outcomes, thus
establishing GT as a complementary data source. GT yields a measure of the interest 
of Google search-engine users in a subject or a specific keyword over time,
resulting in a normalised index [1]. The benefits of GT as a data supplier include
its promptness, inexpensive collection costs, mixed sampling frequency and approaches 
to diversified research areas. There are, however, two issues associated with GT that 
require attention. The first regards the frequency of the returned index, which depends 
on the time length and span required, leading to limited historical data in high-frequency 
sampling. If daily data are necessary, then GT is limited to 9-months of data, whereas 
monthly sampling grants more than 5-years of data. Since GT normalises indexes, stacking 
multiple time frames to obtain extended periods of high-frequency data would conceal 
eventual trends in the underlying data; thus, temporal disaggregation procedures must be 
applied [2]. The second issue involves the data source sampling noise since different 
indexes are produced on distinct days, even when all the other constraints (time length, 
time span, subject and keywords) are kept constant. As GT considers aggregated searches 
based on samples, performing collections over multiple days and summarising them into a 
single measure controls for the data uncertainty [1]. This work addresses the construction 
of  a time series predictor from GT’s indexes in a nowcasting exercise with mixed frequency 
data.

Keywords: google trends, data source, high-frequency sampling

Acknowledgements Eduardo Andre Costa gratefully acknowledges support from CEF.UP/FCT
                 (UIDB/04105/2020) and FCT (2021.07583.BD).

References
1. McLaren, N., Shanbhogue, R. Using internet search data as economic indicators. Bank Engl.
   Q. Bull. 51(2), 134–140 (2011)
2. Eichenauer, V.Z., Indergand, R., Martínez, I.Z., Sax, C. Obtaining consistent time series 
   from Google Trends. Econ. Inq. 60(2), 694–705 (2022)
























