Nonlinear Approaches for Multiple Instance Learning

Annabella Astorino, Matteo Avolio, and Antonio Fuduli

Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) is a variant of traditional supervised learning
consisting in classifying bags of instances. Differently from the traditional supervised
learning scenario, each example is not represented by a fixed-length vector of features
but by a bag of feature vectors called instances. In the training phase the classification
labels are only provided for each entire bag whereas the labels of the instances inside
them are unknown. The final task is to learn a model that predicts the labels of the
new incoming bags together with the labels of the instances inside them.
  We address the MIL problem in the case of two types of instances and two
types of bags (positive and negative) through polyhedral approaches. The idea is
to generate a polyhedral separation surface such that, for each positive bag, at least
one of its instances is inside the polyhedron and all the instances of each negative
bag are outside. We come out with two models. For solving the first one, starting
from the MIL-SVM type model proposed in [1], we develope a technique based on
iteratively separating the bags by means of successive maximum-margin polyhedral
surfaces, obtained by solving successive linear programs. In the second, substituting
the separating hyperplane with a maximum-margin polyhedral surface in the SVMtype model 
presented in [2], we obtain a nonsmooth unconstrained optimization
problem of DC (Difference of Convex) type that we solve by adapting the DCA
algorithm. Numerical results are presented on a set of benchmark datasets.

Keywords: multiple instance learning, SVM, polyhedral separation

References
1. Andrews, S.,Tsochantaridis,I., Hofmann, T.: Support vector machines for multiple-instance
   learning. In: Becker, S., Thrun, S., Obermayer, K., (eds.) Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, pp. 561-568. MIT Press, Cambridge (2003).
2. Bergeron, C., Moore, G., Zaretzki, J., Breneman, C.M., Bennett, K.P.: Fast bundle algorithm
   for multiple-instance learning. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 34, 1068–1079 (2012).






