Franz Liszt’s Transcendental Études: an Evolutionary Analysis by Machine Learning

Matteo Farné

Musical data mining is a young discipline, that is gaining momentum in recent
years (see [1]). In this paper, we apply the most relevant tools of Music Information
Retrieval (MIR, see [2]) to Franz Liszt’s Transcendental Études, with the aim to
mark the evolution of his composition style and musical grammar. We consider the
three versions of Transcendental Études published by the composer in 1826, 1837
and 1851. We perform a systematic evolutionary analysis of each Étude, and we
compare different recordings of some Études.
  For each trace, we estimate the amplitude spectrum, the envelope spectrum, and
the spectrogram, in order to retrieve the musical content in terms of frequencies
and intensity over time. Based on the estimated spectral features, we derive the
chromagram, that is the redistribution of the spectrum over the twelve notes of the
chromatic scale across all the registers. We also perform a segmentation based on the
degree of novelty, intended as spectral dissimilarity, calculated frame-by-frame via
the cosine distance. This process allows to discover and compare the macro-formal
structure of the Études across the three published versions in terms of harmonic and
melodic content.
  Generally speaking, we learn that the first version represents a sketch of each
Étude, the second version is a highly technical evolution of the first version, while
the definitive version is characterized by the high degree of technical difficulty of
the second version and the same formal clarity of the first version.

Keywords: musical data mining, spectral analysis, Franz Liszt

References
1. Cancino-Chacón, C., Carlos E., Grachten, M., Goebl, W., Widmer, G.: Computational models
   of expressive music performance: a comprehensive and critical review. Frontiers in Digital
   Humanities. 5, 321–354 (2018)
2. Müller, M. Fundamentals of music processing: audio, analysis, algorithms, applications.
   Springer, 2015.
3. Lartillot, O., Toiviainen, P., Eerola, T.: A MATLAB toolbox for music information retrieval.
   In: Data analysis, machine learning and applications, pp. 261-268. Springer, (2008)






