Multinomial Multilevel Models with Discrete Random Effects: a Multivariate Clustering Tool

Chiara Masci, Francesca Ieva, and Anna Maria Paganoni

We propose a Semi-Parametric Mixed-Effects Multinomial regression model to deal
with estimation and inference issues in the case of categorical data with a 
hierarchical structure [1]. Considering a K−categories response, the proposed modelling
assumes the probability of each response category to be identified by a set of fixed
and random effects parameters, one for each logit, estimated by means of an EM
algorithm [2]. Random effects are assumed to follow a discrete distribution with an
a priori unknown number of support points, that identifies a latent structure at the
highest level of grouping, where observations are clustered into (K−1)−dimensional
subpopulations. This method is an extension of the MSPEM algorithm proposed in
[4], in which we relax the independence assumption across random-effects relative
to different response categories. Since the category-specific random effects arise
from the same subjects, their independence assumption is seldom verified in real
data and, by relaxing it, the proposed method properly fits the natural data structure,
as emerges by the results of simulation and case studies. In the case study, we apply
the algorithm to Politecnico di Milano data, to model different categories of student
careers, where students are enrolled in 20 engineering degree courses. Results are
compared to the ones of the parametric MCMCglmm appraoch [3].

Keywords: mixed-effects models, categorical responses, discrete random effects,
          higher education.

References
1. Agresti, A.: An introduction to categorical data analysis. Wiley (2018)
2. Dempster, A.P., Laird, N.M., & Rubin, D.B.: Maximum likelihood from incomplete data
   via the EM algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 39(1), 1-22 (1977).
3. Hadfield, J.D.: MCMC methods for multi-response generalized linear mixed models: the
   MCMCglmm R package. Journal of statistical Software, 33, 1-22 (2010).
4. Masci, C., Ieva, F., & A.M. Paganoni: Semiparametric Multinomial Mixed-Effects Models: A
   University Students Profiling Tool. Annals of Applied Statistics, in press (2022)









