Multi-Perspective Risky User Classification in Social Networks

Antonio Pellicani, Gianvito Pio, and Michelangelo Ceci

The widespread adoption of social media platforms opened up new ways to connect
and engage in a globalized manner. However, it also led to the introduction of
harmful addiction phenomena, and to the spread of cyberbullying and cyberterrorism
activities. As a result, monitoring operations on the content published by users, as
well as on their behavior, has become critical to ensure a correct and safe use of social
medias. This monitoring process becomes very difficult in presence of borderline
users, i.e., users who appear to act in safe way based on their posted content, but not
according to other viewpoints (e.g., their relationships), and viceversa.
  In this context, this abstract contributes towards an effective identification of
risky users in social networks. Specifically, we propose a novel method that solves
node classification tasks in social networks by exploiting the information conveyed
by three different perspectives: the semantics of the textual content generated by
users, the network of user relationships, and the users spatial closeness, derived
from geo-tagging metadata associated with posted contents.
  Existing approaches that consider multiple perspectives are mainly based on the
injection of features identified from one perspective into the other [2], or are tailored
for the analysis of the network structure and node attributes, without being able to
capture the semantics of the generated content [1]. On the contrary, our method
builds three models that exploit the peculiarities of each viewpoint, and learns a final
model to fuse their contributions through a stacked generalization approach.
  Our experiments on two variants of a real Twitter dataset showed that the proposed
method outperforms 13 competitors based on one or more perspectives. This advantage 
is also clear on borderline users, confirming the applicability of our method in
real-world social networks, which are potentially affected by noisy data.

Keywords: social network analysis, user risk identification, spatial analysis

References
1. Pio, G.: Multi-type clustering and classification from heterogeneous networks. Inf. Sci. 425,
   107–126 (2018)
2. Campbell, W.: Content+ context networks for user classification in twitter. NIPS 2014 
   Workshop (2014)











