The Usefulness of Selected Machine Learning Methods for Estimating Missing Data to
Supplement Databases Used for Corporate Bankruptcy Prediction

Barbara Pawelek and Jozef Pociecha

Socio-economic consequences of corporate bankruptcies and forecasting the risk
firms’ bankruptcy enjoys unflagging interest among researchers and practitioners.
Financial indicators that are the basis for building forecasting models very often
contain data shortages. In our previous research, we supplemented the missing
data primarily by median of a given variable, determined separately for bankrupt
and non-bankrupt firms [2]. The aim of the paper is presentation the results of
investigations on the usefulness of selected machine learning methods for estimation
values of missing data (e.g. multivariate imputation method based on random forests),
to supplement databases used for building and estimations corporate bankruptcy
prediction models. The study included three databases designed to forecast the
bankruptcy of enterprises in Poland one year, two years and three years in advance.
Various mechanisms for generating data gaps were considered [1]. Selected methods
were used to estimate missing data, such as: mean, median, k-nearest neighbors,
classification tree, multivariate imputation based on random Forests or predictive
mean matching [3], and others.

Keywords: missing data, bankruptcy prediction, machine learning

References
1. Kauermann, G., Küchenhoff, H., Heumann, C.: Statistical Foundations, Reasoning and 
   Inference. For Science and Data Science. Springer, Cham (2021)
2. Pociecha, J., Pawelek, B., Baryla, M., Augustyn, S.: Classification Models as Tools of
   Bankruptcy Prediction – Polish Experience. In: Mola, F., Conversano, C., Vichi, M. (eds.)
   Classification, (Big) Data Analysis and Statistical Learning. Springer, Cham (2018)
3. van Buuren, S., Groothuis-Oudshoorn, K.: mice: Multivariate Imputation by Chained Equations 
   in R. J. Stat. Softw. 45(3), 1-67 (2011)











