Reinforced EM Algorithm Through Clever Initialization for Clustering with Gaussian
Mixture Models

Joshua Tobin, Chin Pang Ho, and Mimi Zhang

Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) are a prominent clustering method that assume
the data generating process to be a mixture distribution of a finite number of 
Gaussian components. The clusters are taken to be the constituent components. GMMs
are ubiquitous in clustering applications as they are both simple and flexible, 
allowing the clusters to vary in terms of their shape, size and orientation. In practice,
the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm is used to find maximum likelihood
estimates of the GMM parameters. As the likelihood function is non-convex, care
must be taken to ensure that EM is initialized with values close to the true parameters. 
Present initialization methods fail to provide such estimates. The random
initialization approach fails to ensure consistency between runs, and can cause EM
to converge to arbitrarily bad values of the likelihood. A widely used deterministic
approach initializes EM using partitions from likelihood-based hierarchical clustering. 
This method is computationally infeasible for large datasets, and is ill-suited for
detecting clusters of different sizes. We here propose initialization scheme which is
applicable to large datasets and reliably produces consistent clustering outputs. We
apply an efficient mode-finding criterion to generate a set of initial mean vectors.
This set is then pruned through optimization of a convex objective with an adaptive
cardinality penalty. We demonstrate how to prune the mean vectors one at a time,
generating a sequence of nested clustering results. We provide guidance on how
to select the optimal clustering from this sequence. We present theoretical guarantees 
for the quality of our initialization and experimental results to verify that our
algorithm works well in practice.

Keywords: exemplar, Gaussian mixtures, density peaks, convex optimization.











