Creating Homogeneous Sectors: Criteria and Applications of Sectorization

Cristina Lopes, "Maria Margarida" Lima, Elif Göksu Öztürk, "Ana Maria" Rodrigues,
"Ana Catarina" Nunes, Cristina Oliveira, "José Soeiro" Ferreira, and "Pedro Filipe" Rocha

Sectorization is the process of grouping a set of previously defined basic units
(points or small areas) into a fixed number of sectors. Sectorization is also known
in the literature as districting or territory design [1], and is usually performed to
optimize one or more criteria regarding the geographic characteristics of the territory
and the planning purposes of sectors. The most common criteria are equilibrium,
compactness and contiguity, which can be measured in many ways [2].
  Sectorization is similar to clustering but with a different motivation. Both aggregate 
smaller units into groups. But, while clustering strives for inner similarity of
data, sectorization aims at outer homogeneity [1]. In clustering, groups should be
very different from each other, and similar points are classified in the same cluster.
In sectorization, groups should be very similar to each other, and therefore very
different points can be grouped in the same sector.
  We classify sectorization problems into four types: basic sectorization, sectorization 
with service centers, resectorization, and dynamic sectorization. A Decision
Support System for Sectorization, D3S, is being developed to deal with these four
types of problems. Multi-objective genetic algorithms were implemented in D3S
using Python, and a user-friendly web interface was developed using Django. Several 
applications can be solved with D3S, such as political districting, sales territory
design, delivery service zones, and assignment of fire stations and health services to
the population.

Keywords: sectorization, clustering, decision support system, optimization

References
1. Kalcsics, J., Nickel, S., Schroeder,M.: Towards a unified territorial design approach - 
   Applications, algorithms and GIS integration. TOP 13(1), 1–56 (2005)
2. Rodrigues, A.M., Ferreira, J.S.: Measures in Sectorization Problems. In: Póvoa, A., 
   de Miranda, J. (eds.) Operations Research and Big Data 15. Springer, Cham. (2015)












