Sampling Design for Uncovering Natural Laws in Compositional Data

Lan Liang, Glòria Mateu-Figueras, and Jan Graffelman

Natural law refers to a stable mathematical relationship being constructed by some
parts of the composition obtained from nature. One of the common forms of natural
laws in the composition is the constant logcontrast relationship between parts, usually
indicating a compositional system at an equilibrium state. A statistical approach to
detecting this form of law includes two steps: 1) collecting appropriate data for
the analysis, and 2) choosing proper statistical methods to analyze the data. In
the aspect of statistical methodology, ample studies have shown that the logratio
principal component analysis (LR-PCA) is an effective tool for detecting the constant
logcontrast patterns [1, 2]. However, though the sampling design is also an important
aspect of statistical design, limited literature discusses its effect on drawing accurate
conclusions about the laws in composition. Therefore, this study aims to investigate
the limitations of different sampling methods on LR-PCA procedure and develop
more suitable sampling strategies for law detection.
  Through a simulation study of genotype frequencies in Hardy Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE), 
we found that when generating a 3D compositional data set containing HWE law, if one variable 
is assigned an exact value and thus has a small variance, the ratios between pair-wise variables 
are close to constants. In this context, the LR-PCA may report the proportionality between two 
parts instead of the law of interest. To avoid this problem, high heterogeneity in compositional 
samples is required.

Keywords: compositional data, natural law, constant logcontrast, 
          logratio principal component analysis (LR-PCA), sampling

References
1. Aitchison, J.: Logratios and natural laws in compositional data analysis. Mathematical 
  Geology. 31 (5), 563–580 (1999)
2. Pawlowsky-Glahn, V., Egozcue, J.J., Tolosana-Delgado, R.: Modeling and Analysis of Compositional 
   Data. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester (2015)













