Fisher Discriminant Analysis for Interval Data

Diogo Pinheiro, M. Rosário Oliveira, Igor Kravchenko, and Lina Oliveira

In Data Science, entities are typically characterized by vectors of single-valued
measurements, called conventional data. Symbolic Data Analysis can model more
complex data structures like lists, intervals, histograms, or even distributions. These
complex structures may result from the aggregation of conventional data according
to the research interests or may exist in their own right. The complexity of these data
structures brings new statistical challenges and the need of new methodologies to
extract information from it, of which classification is a good example.
  In this work, we propose an extension of the conventional Fisher Discriminant
Analysis based on Mallows’ distance and Moore’s interval algebraic structure. The
squared Mallows’ distance between two interval-valued vectors is written as an explicit 
form of the sum of two squared Euclidean distances between the vectors of the
interval’s centers and the vectors of the interval’s ranges. The ranges’ contribution is
weighted according to the assumption of the micro-data distribution within intervals,
extending previous work on this topic. This allows us to define associated symbolic
covariances matrices that can be decomposed into within and between covariance
matrices. Using Moore’s algebraic structure, we generalize Fisher’s objective function 
to interval data, aiming to discriminate between two classes. Examples based
on real problems are used to illustrate the advantages of this approach over the
conventional one, which ignores the interval structure of the data.

Acknowledgements This work was supported by Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia, Portugal,
                 through the projects UIDB/04621/2020, PTDC/EGE-ECO/30535/2017 and 
                 UID/MAT/04459/2020.

Keywords: symbolic data analysis, classification, symbolic Fisher discriminant analysis, 
          interval-valued data, Mallows’ distance













