ExactTree: an R-Package for Globally Optimal Decision Trees

E. Dusseldorp, J. Claramunt Gonzales, J.J. Meulman, S. Uysal, and B.J. Os

Decision trees, such as Classification and Regression Trees (CART) are grown
using binary recursive partioning. The goal is to predict a categorical outcome
(classification) or a continuous outcome (regression) as good as possible using
binary splits on predictor variables. Because our goal is to preserve interpretability,
we focus in this paper on single trees. The tree algorithm starts with all objects in the
root node and subsequently searches for the predictor variable and split point that
leads to the maximum decrease in impurity (e.g., residual sum of squares); then the
root node is split into two child nodes. This process is repeated at each node until a
full tree is grown. A downside of this recursive procedure is the risk of arriving at a
local minimum. Therefore, several attempts have been made to grow globally optimal
trees, among which evolutionary trees [1], based on a meta-heuristic algorithm, and
the method ExactTree [2, 3], that optimizes the entire tree structure globally using
dynamic programming. We performed a benchmark study comparing both methods
on predictive accuracy and stability. Results on part of the data sets showed similar
predictive accuracies, but higher stability for ExactTree. In our presentation, we show
the final results and demonstrate the R-package ExactTree for you.

Keywords: decision trees, interpretable machine learning, classification, regression,
          global optimization

References
1. Grubinger, T., Zeileis, A., Pfeiffer, K-P: evtree: Evolutionary learning of globally optimal
   classification and regression trees in R. J. Stat. Softw. 61, 1–29 (2014)
2. Os, B.J.: Dynamic Programming in Multivariate Data Analysis. Leiden University (2000)
3. Meulman, J.J., Dusseldorp, E., Os, B.J.: An exact dynamic programming algorithm for regression 
   trees. In: Van der Heĳden, M., Koren, B., Van der Mei, R.D., Van Vonderen, J.A.J. (eds.) 
   Jan Karel Lenstra, the Traveling Science Man: Liber Amicorum, pp. 198–208. CWI, Amsterdam (2011).













