Density Modelling via Functional Data Analysis

Stefano A. Gattone and Tonio Di Battista

Recent technological advances have eased the collection of big amounts of data
in many research field. In this scenario an useful statistical technique is density
estimation which represents an important source of information. One dimensional
density functions represent a special case of functional data subject to the constraints
to be non-negative and with a constant integral equal to one [1]. Because of these
constraints, densities functions do not form a vector space and a naive application of
functional data analysis (FDA) methods may lead to non valid estimates. To address
this issue two main strategies can be found in the literature. In the first, the probability
density functions (pdfs) are mapped into a linear functional space through a suitably
chosen transformation [2]. Established methods for Hilbert space valued data can
be applied to the transformed functions and the results are moved back into the
density space by means of the inverse transformation. In the second strategy, pdfs
are treated as an infinite dimensional compositional data since they are part of some
whole which only carry relative information. An approach based on the Aitchison
geometry for compositional data has been sketched in [3, 4]. In this work, by means
of a suitable transformation, densities are embedded in the Hilbert space of square
integrable functions where standard FDA methodologies can be applied.

Keywords: constrained estimator, functional data analysis, probability density functions.

References
1. Ramsay, J.O. and Silverman, B.W.: Functional Data Analysis, 2nd edn. Springer, New York
   (2005)
2. Petersen, A. and Muller, H.: Functional data analysis for density functions by transformation
   to a Hilbert space. Ann. Stat. 32(1), 183–218 (2016)
3. Delicado, P.: Dimensionality reduction when data are density functions. Comput. Stat. Data.
   Anal. 55, 401–420 (2011)
4. Hron, K., Menafoglio, M., Templ, M., Hruzova, K. and Filzmoser, P.: Simplicial principal
   component analysis for density functions in Bayes spaces. Comput. Stat. Data. Anal. 94,
   330–350 (2016)












