Experimental Study of Similarity Measures for Clustering Uncertain Time Series

Michael Dinzinger, Michael Franklin Mbouopda, and Engelbert Mephu Nguifo

Uncertain time series (uTS) are time series whose values are not precisely known.
Each value in such time seris can be given as a best estimate and an error deviation
on that estimate. These kind of time series are preponderant in transient astrophysics
where transient objects are characterized by the time series of their light curves
which are uncertain because of many factors including moonlight, twilight and atmospheric 
factors. An example of uTS dataset can be found at (https://www.kaggle.com/c/PLAsTiCC-2018). 
Similarly to traditional time series, machine learning can be used to analyze uTS. This 
analyzis is generally performed in the literature using uncertain similarity measures. 
In particular, uTS clustering has been performed using FOTS, an uncertain similarity measure 
based on eigenvalues decomposition [3]. Elsewhere, the uncertain euclidean distance (UED), 
which is based on uncertainty propagation has been proposed and used to perform the classification 
of uTS [2]. Given UED performance on supervised classication, the goal of this work is to assess 
the effectiveness of this uncertain measure for uTS clustering.
  A preliminary experiment has been conducted in that direction, the source code and results of the 
experiment are publicly available online (https://github.com/dim35216/UED_Clustering.git). In the 
experiment, FOTS, UED and euclidean distance are compared as measures for uTS clustering using the
datasets from [2]. The obtained results revealed that UED is a promising uncertain measure for uTS 
clustering. As future direction, an extended experiment with other uncertain similarity measures such 
as DUST and PROUD [1] will be conducted.

Keywords: time series, clustering, uncertainty, similarity

Acknowledgements This work has been partially supported by the LabEx IMobS3.

References
1. Dallachiesa, M., Nushi, B., Mirylenka, K., and Palpanas, T.: Uncertain timeseries Similarity:
   Return to the Basics. In: VLDB Endowment, 2012, vol. 11, p. 1662–1673.
2. Mbouopda, M. F. and Mephu Nguifo, E.: Uncertain time series classification with shapelet
   transform. In: International Conference on Data Mining Workshops. IEEE, 2020. p. 259-266.
3. Siyou Fotso, V. S., Mephu Nguifo, E., and Vaslin, P.: Frobenius correlation based u-shapelets
   discovery for time series clustering. Pattern Recognition, 2020, vol. 103, p. 107301.













