Trade and Bank Credit of Portuguese SMEs: a Panel Data Application

Carla Henriques, Pedro Pinto, and Carolina Cardoso

Financial constraints are an obstacle to the growth and development of small and
medium-sized enterprises (SME) [3]. The literature review shows that SMEs 
preferentially resort to bank credit to face these constraints [2]. However, given the
limitations to which they are subject and the constraints they encounter with the
banking system, trade credit appears as an alternative for many companies [2].
To study the determinants of bank credit and trade credit, regression models with
panel data were used, considering a time horizon of ten years (2010 to 2019). The
data were collected through the SABI (Iberian Balance Sheets Analysis System),
selecting 5860 Portuguese SMEs with a total of 58,600 panel data records. The
models include the firm’s information on the return on assets, collateral security,
current ratio, turnover growth and Altman’s Z score of bankruptcy prediction [1],
as independent variables. The time dummies were also included. Several models
were estimated using fixed effects and random effects estimation and the same
conclusions were drawn. This study is considered relevant for Portuguese SMEs,
banking institutions and stakeholders, as the main factors that influence the use of
bank credit and trade credit are analyzed along with an indicator of financial distress.

Keywords: panel data, regression models, trade credit, bank credit

References
1. Altman, E. I.: Corporate Financial Distress: A Complete Guide to Predicting, Avoiding, and
   Dealing with Bankruptcy (Frontiers in Finance Series). John Wiley & Sons (1983)
2. D’Ignazio, A., Menon, C.: Causal Effect of Credit Guarantees for Small- and Medium-Sized
   Enterprises: Evidence from Italy. The Scandinavian Journal of Ecnonomics, 122(1), 191-218.
   (2020)
3. Moscalu, M., Girardone, C., Calabrese, R.: SMEs’ growth under financing constrains and
   banking markets integration in the euro area. Journal of Small Business Management. 58(4),
   707–746 (2020)













