PD-Clustering for Mixed Data Type

Francesco Palumbo and Cristina Tortora

Data clustering aims to find homogeneous groups in the data using systematic
numerical methods; non-hierarchical algorithms can offer considerable advantages
over other approaches. Above all, they are easily parallelizable. In a few words,
they solve an optimization problem to find two quantities: the cluster memberships
and the cluster parameters, which depend on each other. Therefore, algorithms
alternatively compute the two quantities, optimizing the same criterion at each step,
and stop when the criterion reaches a minimum (maximum). The membership can
be crisp or probabilistic: a point is assigned to all the clusters with a degree of
membership. Probabilistic Distance Clustering (PDC) maximizes the classifiability
of all the observations assuming that the belonging probability to each cluster is
inversely proportional to the distance from the cluster center [1].
To jointly consider mixed data variables, one possible solution is to re-code all
variables in a single data type through pre-processing, which can seriously weaken
the true association structure. Some satisfactory clustering methods for mixed data
exist, but they tend to be slow. The primary issue in clustering mixed data is the
identification of a unified similarity metric. The most popular approaches based on
this idea are k-prototypes [3] and KAy-means for MIxed LArge data (Kamila) [2].
This proposal extends the PDC to mixed-type data using a dissimilarity for mixedtype 
data and redefining the cluster centers. The cluster parameters that optimize the
criterion are based on the updated dissimilarity and integrated into the algorithm.
The performance of the new algorithm are compared to K-prototype and Kamila.

Keywords: probabilistic distance clustering, mixed data

References
1. A. Ben-Israel, C. Iyigun, Probabilistic d-clustering, J Class 25 (1) (2008) 5–26.
2. A. H. Foss, M. Markatou, kamila: Clustering mixed-type data in R and Hadoop, J Stat Softw
  83 (13) (2018) 1–45.
3. G. Szepannek, clustmixtype: User-friendly clustering of mixed-type data in r, The R Journal
   10 (2) (2018) 200–208.













