Biplots in Dimension Reduction and Clustering

Alfonso Iodice D’Enza, Angelos Markos, and Michel van de Velden

In unsupervised learning, dimension reduction (e.g., PCA) and distance-based 
clustering are often applied sequentially: the distances used to cluster the 
observations are computed on the reduced dimensions. Since the dimension reduction 
step does not take into account the possible cluster structure, it is possibly detrimental 
to the clustering step. Methods for joint dimension reduction and clustering combine the
two in a single optimization problem which is solved using iterative procedures alternating 
the two steps. Just like for principal component methods, different approaches
have been proposed that deal with continuous, categorical or mixed-type data. In
particular, for continuous data, reduced K-means [1] combines principal component
analysis with K-means clustering; for categorical data, cluster correspondence analysis [2] 
combines correspondence analysis with K-means; for mixed-type data, mixed Reduced K-means [3] 
combines factor analysis for mixed data with K-means. The biplot visualization of the solution 
is of particular interest for interpretation purposes: in fact, the low-dimensional map can be 
very helpful for cluster characterization. In this work, we illustrate the use of biplots in the 
context of dimension reduction and clustering.

Keywords: biplot, dimension reduction, clustering

References
1. De Soete, G., Carroll, J. D.: K-means clustering in a low-dimensional Euclidean space. In: E.
   Diday, et al. (eds.), New approaches in classification and data analysis, pp. 212–219, Springer,
   Heidelberg (1994)
2. van de Velden, M., Iodice D’Enza, A., Palumbo, F.: Cluster correspondence analysis. 
   Psychometrika 82(1), 158–185 (2017)
3. van de Velden, M., Iodice D’Enza, A., Markos, A.: Distance-based clustering of mixed data.
   Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statistics 11(3), e1456 (2019)














