Misalignment of Spectral Data: Constrained Optimization in a Functional Data Analysis
Framework

Francesca Di Salvo, "Delia Francesca" Chillura Martino, and Gabriella Chirco

Across several branches of sciences, a large number of applications involves data
represented as functions and curves, for which functional data analysis can play a
central role in solving a variety of problem formulations. With some thecnologies,
the obtained data are spectra containing a vast amount of information concerning the
composition of a sample: in order to infer the chemical composition of the materials
from spectra, functional data analysis offers a valuable mean for characterizing
the spectral response through identification of peaks position and intensity. The
collection of data from different measurement may exhibit similar peak pattern but
display misalignment in their peaks. In general, the multiple alignment is crucial in
the subsequent analysis; the method proposed faces with the challenge of random
shifts in the peaks and implements constraints in a proper objective function to
optimize the alignment. The constraints are based on a priori information that is
formalized in the choice of a set of peaks across functions. Spectrum data from
X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) and Total Reflectance-Fourier Transform Infra-Red (TRFTIR) 
spectroscopies are considered to illustrate the approach and to provide useful
comparison with other approaches.

Keywords: multple alignment, functional data analysis, constrained registration

References
1. Houhou, R., Rösch, P., Popp, J., Bocklitz, T.: Comparison of functional and discrete data
   analysis regimes for Raman spectra. Anal. and Bioanal. Chem.413, 5633–5644, (2021)
2. Marron, J.S., Ramsay, J.O., Sangalli L. M., Srivastava, A.: Functional Data Analysis of
   Amplitude and Phase Variation. Stat. Sci. 30, No. 4, 468–484, (2015)
3. Srivastava, A., Klassen, E.P.: Functional and Shape Data Analysis. Springer Series in 
   Statistics, Springer-Verlag, New York (2016)















