Robust Classification for Toroidal Data

Giovanni Saraceno, Luca Greco, and Claudio Agostinelli

Circular data commonly occur in many different fields, such as biology, meteorology
and geology, where observations can be measured by angles. Here, we consider the
problem of classifying circular observations into one of possible distinct populations
and we focus on the situations where observations can be thought as points that lie on
the surface of a Torus. Some proposals can be found in literature for the classification
of circular data, however this problem is poorly explored in case of toroidal data.
In general, the traditional procedures for the classification problem can be greatly
affected by inaccurancies in features and labels of training data. Hence, we propose
a procedure based on the weighted likelihood technique which is able to classify
new data points scattered on a p-dimensional torus following multivariate Wrapped
Normal distributions. In particular, the Weighted CEM algorithm proposed by [1]
is applied on the training data set considering the classes separately. Ineed, this
estimator is able to handle the model inadequacies in the fitting process by an
effective downweighting of observations not following the assumed model. In this
way, a pair of robust location and scale estmates are available for each group. In a
second step, a set of data-dependent weights is computed for the testing data points
for each group-based estimates. Finally, the resulting weights are used to classify
each observations into one of the groups or none of them. The finite sample behavior
of the proposed procedure is investigated by a Monte Carlo numerical study and real
data examples.

Keywords: classification, multivariate wrapped distributions, robust estimators,
torus, weighted likelihood

References
1. G. Saraceno and C. Agostinelli and L. Greco (2021). Robust estimation for multivariate
   wrapped models. METRON, 79:225–240.
















