Hausdorff Distance: a Powerful Tool for Matching Households and Individuals in
Historical Censuses

Thais Pacheco Menezes, Michael Fop, and Thomas Brendan Murphy

Matching households and individuals in historical censuses can be difficult due to
the absence of unique identifiers, typographical errors, and changes in attributes over
time. The tools of record linkage are of great assistance when linking households
and individuals in historical censuses. In this work, we define a general multi-step
record linkage procedure that allows the incorporation of household information
to improve the process of matching entities across different databases. We propose
using the Hausdorff distance when comparing households in historical censuses.
A constrained logistic regression model with attribute level Hausdorff distances is
developed to estimate the probability of a match between any two households. The
probabilities from this model are then employed to match households across the
databases. Subsequently, individuals within households are matched using a logistic
regression based on attribute level distances. The probabilities estimated from this
regression are used in a linear programming optimization framework to enforce oneto-one 
matches between individuals in the matched household across the databases.
The methodology is developed in application to record linkage of the Irish census
databases of 1901 and 1911. The analysis focuses on a number of regions for which
labels of matching households and individuals are available, allowing training and
testing of the procedure. The approach is shown to yield 65.15% correct household
matches for regions that are close to the region used for model training and 58.70%
correct household matches for more distant regions. When matching individuals
within households, an average correct individual match rate of 86.2% is found for
individuals within correctly matching households.

Keywords: census, Hausdorff distance, matching databases, record linkage
















