Model-Based Tri-Clustering

Rafika Boutalbi, Lazhar Labiod, and Mohamed Nadif

Classical clustering procedures seek to separately construct an optimal partition of
rows or columns or sometimes of rows and columns simultaneously. In this latter, 
co-clustering methods organize the data into homogeneous blocks. Methods of this kind
have practical importance in a wide variety of applications. However, tensor data
representation is a handy tool to represent data with complex structures. The threeway 
tensors are used in different fields like recommender systems, medical fields and
social studies. Thereby, extending co-clustering to tri-clustering is a good manner
to harness this kind of data. Several tri-clustering algorithms have been proposed
in the literature. As suggested in [1] and through our investigations, we propose
to classify the existing tri-clustering methods into five families: stochastic, greedy,
genetic, tensor factorization and co-clustering based approaches. In our proposal
we propose a flexible model-based tri-clustering. In order to use the model in a
clustering setting, we want to jointly infer the latent variables Z, W, S and learning
the model parameters. We develop an approach based on Variational ExpectationMaximization 
and we derive, thereby, effective tri-clustering algorithms capable to reveal homogeneous 
sub-tensors from a 3-way tensor sparse or not. We illustrate the performances of these 
algorithms through numerical experiments on simulated and real-case datasets comparing with 
baseline algorithms [2, 3] in different fields including text-mining.

Keywords: tri-clustering, tensor, data science, text-mining

References
1. Henriques, R., d Madeira, S. C.: Triclustering algorithms for three-dimensional data analysis:
   a comprehensive survey. In: ACM Comput. Surv. 51(5), 1-43 (2018)
2. Guigourès, R., Boullé, M., Rossi, F.: Discovering patterns in time-varying graphs: a triclustering 
   approach. In: Advances in Data Analysis and Classification. 12(3), 509-536 (2018)
3. Boutalbi, R., Labiod, L., and Nadif, M. Tensorclus: A python library for tensor (co)-clustering.
   In: Neurocomputing, pp. 464–468, (2022)
















