Comparison of K-Mer and Alignment-Based Pre-Processing Approaches for Machine
Learning Based Functional Annotation with 16S RRNA Data

Rafal Kulakowski, Adi Lausen, Etienne Low-Decarie, and Berthold Lausen

Over the last few decades, the continuing advancements in Next-GenerationSequencing 
technologies provided new opportunities to obtain large volumes of biological sequence 
data from uncultured environments. Moreover, continuing efforts to store labelled RNA, 
DNA and protein sequences have opened opportunities to implement Machine Learning (ML) 
techniques and build predictive tools that can estimate key characteristics of sequenced 
environments. Traditionally, processing of biological sequences for comparative analysis 
involved implementing sequence alignment techniques. However, alignment algorithms have 
high computational costs that scale non-linearly with the number of sequences. Moreover, 
current Multiple Sequence Alignment methods produce a representation of data, where a 
format of each sequence is heavily dependent on other most similar sequences in the current
set, making any subsequently trained predictive model unstable.
  Our investigation focused on identifying scalable and effective data pre-processing
techniques for the series of functional annotation tasks using 16S rRNA data [1]. To
this end, we tested the use of a pairwise-alignment pre-processing technique, which
we then compared to an alignment-free, k-mer based method. Additionally, we examined whether 
combining both techniques improves the accuracy of ML classifiers. The results of our 
experiments  showed that the k-mer frequencies provide the most favourable set of features 
for these problems.

Keywords: sequence alignment, k-mer, feature engineering, functional annotation,
          classification

References
1. Kulakowski, R., Lausen, A, Low-Decarie, E., Lausen, B.: Classification Methods for 16S
   rRNA Based Functional Annotation. Archives of Data Science, Series A 4 (1), 23 (2020).

















