Biplots for Categorical and Ordinal Data Based on Logistic Responses

Jose Luis Vicente-Villardon

A joint representation of individuals and variables in a data matrix is called a Biplot.
Biplots were proposed 50 years ago in [1].
  When variables are binary, nominal or ordinal, a classical linear biplot representation 
is not adequate. More recently, biplots for categorical data, based logistic response models, 
have been proposed for binary [2], or nominal data [3]. The coordinates of individuals and 
variables are computed to have logistic responses along the biplot dimensions. The methods are 
related to logistic regression in the same way as Classical Biplots are related to linear 
regression, thus are referred as Logistic Biplots. In the same way as Linear Biplots are related 
to Principal Components Analysis, Logistic Biplots are related to Latent Trait Analysis or Item 
Response Theory. The geometry of those kinds of biplots for binary, nominal or ordinal data is 
studied.
  For binary data we obtain straight lines as representations of the variables.
  For nominal data the representation of the variables on the biplot is not a straight
line but a “prediction region” and for ordinal data a straight line is obtained if the
“proportional odds” model is used.
  Algorithms for the construction on the biplots based on gradient descent methods
are also provided.
  The applicability and interpretation of the logistic biplots is illustrated with several
real data applications.

Keywords: biplot, categorical data, logistic biplot

References
1. Gabriel, K. R. : The biplot graphic display of matrices with application to principal component
   analysis. Biometrika, 58 (3), 453-467. (1971).
2. Vicente-Villardon, J.L., Galindo, M.P., Blazquez-Zaballos, A.: Logistic biplots. In: Greenacre,
   M., Blasius, J. (eds.) Multiple Correspondence Analysis and related methods, pp. 503-521.
   Chapman and Hall, New York (2006)
3. Hernandez-Sanchez, J. C., Vicente-Villardon, J. L. (2017). Logistic biplot for nominal data.
   Advances in Data Analysis and Classification, 11 (2) 307-326.


















