Students’ Assessment Through a IRT and Archetypal Analysis Joint Strategy

Lucio Palazzo and Francesco Palumbo

Item response theory [1, IRT] measures latent traits from one or more sets of manifest
variables, namely items, by defining the relations between the observed variables
(e.g., item responses to a test) and the latent variables. Three of the five higher 
education items that refer to student’s abilities, as defined by the Dublin descriptors, 
are considered in this proposal: knowledge, application, judgment. IRT models assume
that students belong to homogeneous groups concerning these abilities. Mixture
IRT models [2, mixIRT] assume that the observed population is composed of latent
subpopulations with class-specific quantitative parameters, representing a practical
approach to finding groups by aggregating the units with respect to group’s average
abilities. However, assessors generally want to discover "extreme" groups of students:
the most skilled, but especially those profiles that have peculiar deficits for one or
more learning abilities, to define a recommendation system helping the student to fill
the gaps. Archetypical analysis (AA) represents an effective data partitioning alternative 
to the clustering approaches around the means. The archetypes are observed or unobserved 
extreme points lying on the convex-hull, minimizing the sum of the squared distances from 
all points. The algorithm computes a membership vector for each unit with respect to each 
archetype. This proposal integrates the mixIRT model with the probabilistic archetypal 
analysis [3, PAA], presenting a hybrid estimation algorithm which iteratively computes 
the latent variables and the units’ memberships to a set of k archetypes, where k is 
assumed to be known.

Keywords: item response theory, clustering, learning analytics

References
1. Hambleton, R. K., Swaminathan, H.: Item response theory, principles and applications.
   Springer Science & Business Media (1985)
2. Mislevy, Robert J., Verhelst, N.: Modeling item responses when different subjects employ
   different solution strategies. Psychometrika 55.2, 195-215 (1990)
3. Seth, S., Eugster, M.J.A.: Probabilistic archetypal analysis. Mach Learn 102.1, 85-113 (2016)






















