Interpretable Multi-Class Trees for Travel Choice Mode Analysis

Christian Riccio, Andrea Papola, Michele Staiano, and Roberta Siciliano

Analysis of travel mode choice is fundamental to forecast travel demand when 
planning intervention on the supply system. Commonly, this is conducted via Random
Utilities Models (RUMs) which relies on the random utility theory [1]. Recently, the
large availability of travel demand data, mainly from smartphones, has increasingly
led to the use of machine learning models that find their ideal context of use in big
data. Although such models are generally capable of good performance, their intrinsic 
black-box nature is a critical aspect. Hence, to fruitfully apply Machine Learning
approaches to travel mode choice, some enhancements must be considered. Recently,
interpretable machine learning approach [2] has been proposed. The main idea is
to improve the output results of random forests with some additional aids. This
paper provides a new framework to approach interpretable machine learning using
tree-based methods in combination with classical models. The basic rationale with
the main theoretical aspects can be found in old papers [3, 4, 5]. A fresh approach
integrating logistic regression and latent budget models will be demonstrated for a
multi-class response problem typical in transportation studies.

Keywords: tree-based methods, logistic regression, travel mode choice

References
1. Cascetta, E., Papola, A.: Random utility models with implicit availability/perception of choice
   alternatives for the simulation of travel demand. Transport. Res. C-Emer. 9(4), 249–263 (2001)
2. Kim, E-J.: Analysis of Travel Mode Choice in Seoul Using an Interpretable Machine Learning
   Approach. J. Adv. Transp. 2021, 6685004 (2021)
3. Siciliano, R., Mola, F.: Multivariate data analysis and modeling through classification and
   regression trees. Comput. Stat. & Data An. 2021, 6685004 (2021)
4. Siciliano, R.: Latent budget trees for multiple classification. I In: Vichi, M., Opitz, O. (eds)
   Classification and Data Analysis. Studies in Classification, Data Analysis, and Knowledge
   Organization. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (1999)
5. Mola, F., Klaschka, J., Siciliano, R.: Logistic classification trees. In: Prat, A. (ed.) COMPSTAT
   1996, pp. 373-378. Physica-Verlag, Heidelberg (1996)























