A Simulation Study on Variable Selection in Mixture Regression Models

Susana Faria

Finite mixture regression models provide a flexible tool for modeling data that arise
from a heterogeneous population, where the relationship between the response and
the covariates varies across the sub-populations [3]. In the applications of these
models, a large number of covariates are often used and their contributions toward
the response variable vary from one component to another of the mixture model.
For this reason, variable selection assumes a great relevance for mixture models,
something particularly notorious in the last few years.
  Variable selection via penalized likelihood has attracted great attention in recent
literature. In particular, [2] have investigated the variable selection problem for finite
mixture regression models with versions of the penalty functions.
  In this work we analyze the problem of variable selection in finite mixture regression 
models in the presence of a large number of explanatory variables. We study the performance 
of a penalized likelihood approach in identifying the most relevant subset of covariates using 
the Classification Expectation-Maximization algorithm (CEM) [1].
  Simulation examples indicate that the method works well in terms of both variable selection 
and prediction accuracy.

Keywords: mixture of linear models, variable selection, penalized likelihood, 
          classification expectation-maximization (CEM) algorithm

Acknowledgements: Supported by Portuguese funds through the Portuguese Foundation for Science and 
                  Technology, within project PTDC/MAT-STA/28243/2017.

References
1. Celeux, G., Govaert, G.: A classification EM algorithm for clustering and two stochastic
   versions. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 14(3), 315-–332 (1992).
2. Khalili A., Chen J.: Variable selection in finite mixture of regression models. J. Amer. 
   Statist. Assoc. 102, 1025–1038 (2007).
3. McLachlan G.J., Peel D.: Finite Mixture Models. Wiley, New York (2000).
























