A Deep Learning Analytics to Detect Dental Caries

Taerim Lee

Deep Learning Analytics uses predictive models that provide actionable information
for a better prognosis of dental caries. It is a multidisciplinary approach based on 
dental caries data processing, AI technology-learning enhancement, dental caries data
mining, and visualization. Three key components need further clarification to help
them effectively apply deep learning in dental caries prognosis to explain the methods
for conducting deep learning, the benefits of using deep learning, and the challenges
of using learning analytics in dental caries. Discover significant socio-demographic
factors and microbiologic factors to detect the prognosis of dental caries. Compare
the efficiency with other prognosis models using support vector machine, linear
discriminant, random forest, logistic regression by ROC curves using ICD-9 codes
for dental caries, 365 boys and 340 girl cohort with dental caries and normal group
together. All available data variables required to develop and test models were 
identified from a sociodemographic and microbiological records database. Data on 500
records among 705 was utilized for the development of the model and on 205 patients
utilized to perform cross-validation analysis of the models. Socio-demographic data
such as presenting signs & symptoms, presence of caries, microbiologic data, and
corresponding diagnosis and outcomes were collected. Dental data was collected
for each target group was utilized to retrospectively ascertain optimal preventive
management for dental caries. Clinical presentations and corresponding treatment
were utilized as training examples.

Keywords: deep learning analytics; support vector machine; random forest

References
1. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Hinton, G. ImageNet classification with deep convolutional
   neural networks. In Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25 1090–1098
   (2012)
2. Sutskever, I. Vinyals, O. & Le. Q. V. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. 
   In Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27 3104–3112 (2014)


