Monitoring Hyper-Parameter Choice for Robust Cluster Weighted Model

Andrea Cappozzo, Luis Angel García Escudero, Francesca Greselin, and 
Agustín Mayo-Iscar

The estimation of the Cluster Weighted Model is particularly attractive for providing
explicit modeling of the explanatory variables, in a mixture of regression. The Robust
version of the model requires the specification of a set of crucial parameters, like
the proportion of trimmed units \alpha, the thresholds to be adopted for the constrained
estimation of groups scatter and for regression errors, beyond the number of components 
of the Mixture. To assist the choice of such hyper-parameters, a monitoring
methodology could be of great help. The purpose is to provide a set of graphical tools
to guide the final user in making an informed judgment, considering a landscape of
plausible choices. The final output offers a set of optimal solutions, featured by the
interval of hyper-parameters values in which their optimality holds, their stability
and validity. An assessment of the role and extent of the outlying observations has
been provided, introducing three new silhouette plots. The purpose is to understand
the possible effects of the contaminated observations, with respect to the clustering
of the covariate X, and the local regression lines Y, following the nature of the Cluster
Weighted model.

Keywords: cluster-weighted modeling, outliers, trimmed bic, eigenvalue constraint,
monitoring, model-based clustering, robust estimation

References
1. Cappozzo, A., García Escudero, L.A., Greselin, F., and Mayo-Iscar, A.: Parameter Choice,
   Stability and Validity for Robust Cluster Weighted Modeling. Stats 4 (3), 602–615 (2021).
2. Riani, M., Atkinson, A.C., Cerioli, A., and Corbellini, A.: Efficient robust methods via
   monitoring for clustering and multivariate data analysis. Pattern Recognit. 88, 246-260, (2019)
3. Rousseeuw, P.J.: Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster
   analysis. J. Comput. Appl. Math. 20, 53–65 (1987)

























