On the Use of the Choquet Fuzzy Integral to Aggregate Predictions of Time Series: 
an Application to Economic (and Other Types of) Data

Diogo Alves, José Matos, and Sandra Silva

The Choquet Integral with respect to a given fuzzy measure is a powerful aggregation
operator that fuses several sources of information into a single value [1]. An as of
yet unexplored application is the use of the method to aggregate predictions of time
series (as well as supervised learning representations) methods. Time series have an
internal structure based on temporal ordering of the data, and the fact that changes in
the relative ordering of observations would change the meaning of the data is a fact
that presents its own set of challenges in the context of Machine Learning (see [2, 3]
for examples of applications). The objective is twofold: first, to compare the methods
used in terms of performance. Second, to obtain a model acting as an ensemble, able
to muster the relative strengths of each method into a more accurate (in the sense of
smaller in and out-of-sample errors with respect to its components) super predictor,
in a "wisdom of crowds" effect. An application example with 8 time series (of both
synthetic and "real-life" origin) is explored.

Keywords: fuzzy measures, Choquet integral, time series forecasting, arima, 
          supervised learning

References
1. Grabisch, M., Labreuche, C.: Fuzzy Measures and Integrals in MCDA. In: Greco, S., Ehrgott,
   M., Figueira, J. (eds) Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis. International Series in Operations
   Research & Management Science, vol 233, pp 553-603. Springer, New York, NY (2016)
2. Ribeiro, M.H.D.M., Coelho, L.S.: Ensemble approach based on bagging, boosting and stacking
   for short-term prediction in agribusiness time series. App. Soft Comp. 86, 105837 (2020)
3. Cicceri, G., Inserra, G. and Limosani, M. A machine learning approach to forecast economic
   recessions—an italian case study. Mathematics 8(2), 241 (2020)