Classification Over Text, Relational Databases and Graphs - Software and Case Studies

Tomáš Kliegr

Best performing methods often produce models that are hard to interpret, leading
to the so-called accuracy-interpretability trade-off. Also, each data type typically
requires a different type of model, such as BERT transformers for text or node
embeddings for graphs. In projects involving multiple modalities, this leads to a mix
of opaque models, an interpretability and interoperability Babylon.
  This talk will cover rule-based methods as a possible “white-box” Swiss knife applicable 
to multiple data types, including tabular data, text and even large knowledge
graphs with millions of edges and nodes.
  Given the advances in model-agnostic explanation algorithms, do rule models
still have an edge in interpretability over the more opaque classification workhorses
such as random forests? The talk will hint at answers through use cases worked on
at DIKE, such as comparing rule-based explanations with LIME and Shapley plots
in the context text-mining of research articles on COVID-19 [1]. We will also cover
tools such as the arc R package for rule-based classification of tabular data [2], the
Action rule mining system [3], the cloud-based EasyMiner rule classifier and editor
[4], and the RDFRules rule learner for knowledge graphs [5].

Keywords: knowledge graphs, rules, explainable machine learning

Acknowledgements Presented research was partly supported by support of the CIMPLE project
                 (CHIST-ERA-19-XAI-003) and VSE IGA 40/2021.

References
1. Beranová, L., Joachimiak, M.P., Kliegr, T., Rabby, G., and Sklenák, V. Why was this
   cited? explainable machine learning applied to covid-19 research literature. Scientometrics
   (2022), 1–37.
2. Hahsler, M., Johnson, I., Kliegr, T., and Kuchař, J. Associative classification in r: arc,
   arulesCBA, and rCBA. R Journal 9, 2 (2019).
3. Sýkora L., and Kliegr, T. Action Rules: Counterfactual Explanations in Python. RuleML
   Challenge (2020).
4. Vojíř, S., Zeman, V., Kuchař, J., and Kliegr, T. Easyminer.eu: Web framework for interpretable 
   machine learning based on rules and frequent itemsets. Knowledge-Based Systems 150
   (2018), 111–115.
5. Zeman, V., Kliegr, T., and Svátek, V. RDFrules: Making RDF rule mining easier and even
   more efficient. Semantic Web 12, 4 (2021), 569–602

























