Comparing Model Selection Techniques to Determine the Number of Overlapping Clusters
for the Additive Profile Clustering Model

Tom F. Wilderjans, Julian Rossbroich, and Jeffrey Durieux

In several areas of science, researchers aim at disclosing the mechanisms that 
generated object by variable data, like, for example, patient by symptom or consumer
by brand data. Regularly, based on previous knowledge, it makes sense to assume
that these mechanisms can be nicely captured through an object clustering. In such
a case, researchers very often opt for a partitioning method, like, for example, k-means, 
which results in non-overlapping clusters. Sometimes, however, expectations
are that objects can be grouped into clusters that overlap, implying that an object may
belong to multiple clusters. Applied to the patient by symptom data, for example, in
which clusters correspond with syndromes, it is quite natural to assume that patients
may suffer from multiple syndromes at the same time as co-morbidity of syndromes
is often observed in clinical practice. To extract the overlapping object clusters,
Mirkin’s additive profile (overlapping) clustering model may be used. A non-trivial
task consists of determining the optimal number of overlapping clusters that are
present in a given empirical data set. Up to now, however, although some methods
for model selection for ADPROCLUS were proposed before, no systematic attempt
of investigating this issue of model selection has been undertaken. Therefore, in this
presentation, we evaluate in an extensive simulation study several model selection
techniques. In partiular, several new model selection methods for ADPROCLUS,
with some of them being methods for the partitioning case tailored to the context of
overlapping clustering (e.g., AIC, CH-index) are compared to existing methods (e.g.,
CHull, cross-validation). As such, in order to build a cumulative body of knowledge,
our study is a benchmarking study in which the performance of new methods is
carefully compared to the performance of existing methods.

Keywords: overlapping clustering, additive profile clustering, model selection, 
          simulation study, benchmarking

























