Hybrid Forecasting Combinations by Feature Based Metalearning

Moises Santo, Andre C.P.L.F. de Carvalho, and Carlos Soares

A challenge in time series forecasting is selecting the technique that will induce the
best forecasting model for a given time series. Metalearning is a good alternative to
reduce the computational cost and attend to the high need for specialized knowledge
in this area [1]. In recent works, model selection frameworks successfully applied
metalearning to select time series forecasting methods. Allied to metalearning, combining 
forecasts is an up-and-coming alternative to investigate. One of the main
results of a time series competition to assess time series forecasting models, the
Makridakis M4 competition was the victory of a hybrid method that combined the
forecasts of statistical and machine learning models [3]. Several time series forecasting 
approaches have applied Seasonal-Trend decomposition based on Loess (STL) and Empirical Mode 
Decomposition (EMD) to divide the time series into components with different properties to 
generate hybrid forecasting models. However, the models for each component have usually been 
selected arbitrarily. This work investigates the automatic selection of promising hybrid model 
combinations for univariate time series forecasting by using feature-based metalearning. According 
to previous experiments [2], under certain conditions, the application of the STL decomposition
method for the formation of additive hybrid combinations presents better results than the use of 
individual models.

Keywords: time series, hybrid forecasting, metalearning

References
1. Brazdil, P., Carrier, C.G., Soares, C, Vilalta, R.: Metalearning: Applications to data mining.
   Springer Science & Business Media (2008)
2. Silvestre, G.D., Santos, M.R., Carvalho, A.C.P.L.F.: Seasonal-Trend decomposition based on
   Loess+ Machine Learning: Hybrid Forecasting for Monthly Univariate Time Series. In: 2021
   International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (ĲCNN), pp. 1-7. IEEE (2021)
3. Smyl, S.: A hybrid method of exponential smoothing and recurrent neural networks for time
   series forecasting. International Journal of Forecasting 36, 75-85 (2020)


























