Statistical Learning with Dynamic Interaction Data for Public Health

Charles Bouveyron

This work focuses on the problem of statistical learning with dynamic relational data
for two specific public health problems: the analysis of the COVID-19 publication
network and the study of a large-scale pharmacovigilance data set. On the one hand,
the Covid-19 epidemic presented a unique use case for researchers and institutions in
the health field where the ability to monitor and synthesize scientific publications on
a given theme has proven to be strategic. Indeed, with more than 5000 publications
and pre-publications per month on the Covid-19 virus, it has proved essential for
researchers and doctors to have tools capable of synthesizing publications on this
subject by grouping them on the basis of the research themes they mobilize. On the
other hand, pharmacovigilance is a central medical discipline aiming at monitoring
and detecting public health events (adverse drug reactions) caused by medicines and
vaccines. As the current expert detection of safety signals is unfortunately incomplete
due to the workload it represents, we investigate here an automatized method of
safety signal detection from ADR data. To address those problems, we proposed
two generative models for clustering the nodes of a dynamic graph, accounting
for the content of textual edges as well as their frequency, in the first case, and
the co-clustering of dynamic count data, for pharmacovigilance. In both cases, the
continuous time is handled by partitioning the considered time period, allowing the
detection of temporal breaks in the signals.

Keywords: clustering, interaction data, dynamic data, generative model, em algorithm

Acknowledgements This work has been supported by the French government, through the 3IA
                 Côte dAzur Investment in the Future project managed by the National 
                 Research Agency (ANR) with the reference number ANR-19-P3IA-0002.

References
1. C. Bouveyron, M. Corneli, P. Latouche and F. Rossi: The dynamic stochastic topic block 
   model for dynamic networks with textual edges, Statistics and Computing, vol. 29, 
   pp. 677–695 (2019).
2. G. Marchello, A. Fresse, M. Corneli and C. Bouveyron: Co-clustering of evolving count
   matrices in pharmacovigilance with the dynamic latent block model, Preprint HAL 03146769,
   Université Côte d’Azur (2021)

























