Socio-Economic Classification of Territorial Units: Extreme Value Theory-Based 
Methods as Support for the Construction of a Synthetic Index

Aleksandra Łuczak and Małgorzata Just

A socio-economic classification of territorial units is helpful to assess their 
condition and plan their development. However, this process reveals many 
problems, such as data availability, selection of indicators and their measurement, 
selection of appropriate methods for normalization, weighing and aggregation of 
indicators. Aggregation of data depend on kind of data and distribution of 
variables. One of the main problems for real data are atypical observations. They 
are significant complication in the analysis of complex economic phenomena, 
because they have a strong influence on the obtained results [3]. The main goal is 
to present a comprehensive linear ordering procedure using the positional version 
of TOPSIS and methods of extreme value theory to assess the level of socioeconomic 
development of various types of territorial units. We propose a two-step 
procedure based on six automatic methods that identify the tail of the variable 
distribution (atypical observations). Moreover, in order to eliminate the impact of 
asymmetry, mainly in the central part of the variable distribution, we also use the 
positional TOPSIS method based on ideas of Hellwig [1], as well as Hwang and Yoon 
[2]. The proposed procedure was used to assess the socio-economic situation of 
voivodships, districts and municipalities in Poland in 2019. The conducted research
allows to expand the spectrum of quantitative methods used to study complex 
phenomena and improves the quality of research.

Keywords: extreme values, tail distribution, positional TOPSIS, 
          socio-economic situation, territorial units

References
1. Hellwig, Z.: Zastosowania metody taksonomicznej do typologicznego podziału krajów ze 
   względu na poziom ich rozwoju i strukturę wykwalifikowanych kadr. Statistical Review. 4, 
   307–327 (1968)
2. Hwang, C.L.; Yoon, K.: Multiple Attribute Decision Making: Methods and Applications. 
   Springer-Verlag, New York (1981)
3. Łuczak, A., Just, M.: Sustainable development of territorial units: MCDM approach with 
   optimal tail selection. Ecol. Model. 457(1), 109674 (2021)
