On the Measurement of Household Subjective  Poverty: Concepts and Application

Aleksandra Łuczak and Sławomir Kalinowski

Poverty is a multi-dimensional phenomenon that cannot be directly measured 
correctly by a single indicator. Research on poverty uses both objective and 
subjective indicators. Objective measures do not show the complete nature of 
poverty as they only examine economic conditions, mainly household income or 
expenses, or their basic needs. Hence, our research focuses on subjective poverty, 
which includes the diversity of perceptions of poverty among respondents. The aim 
of the research is to present and compare methodological approaches to the 
construction of a synthetic measure of subjective household poverty. The research 
took into account the aggregation of variables describing the past, present, and 
future. The procedure of constructing a synthetic measure utilized the measure of 
distance between triangular fuzzy numbers [2] and the generalized distance measure 
[5]. However, the aggregation of variables relied on three fuzzy methods based on 
the ideas of Hellwig [3], TOPSIS [4] and Chen [1]. The approaches were used to assess 
the level of subjective household poverty in Poland. The study was based on data 
collected using the CAWI method in April 2021. The use of fuzzy approaches to the 
assessment of subjective poverty allows more precise determination of its level than 
with the standard measurement. In addition, the subjective poverty measure can 
also be used as a basis for formulating poverty reduction strategies.

Keywords: subjective poverty, fuzzy Hellwig’s method, fuzzy TOPSIS, GDM

References
1. Chen S.M.: Evaluating weapon systems using fuzzy arithmetic operations, Fuzzy Set Syst 
   77 (3), pp. 265–276 (1996).
2. Chen, C.T. Extensions of the TOPSIS for group decision-making under fuzzy environment. 
   Fuzzy Set Syst, 114, 1–9 (2000).
3. Hellwig Z.: Zastosowania metody taksonomicznej do typologicznego podziału krajów ze 
   względu na poziom ich rozwoju i strukturę wykwalifikowanych kadr. Statistical Review 4, 
   307–327 (1968).
4. Hwang C.L.; Yoon K.: Multiple attribute decision making: methods and applications. 
   Springer-Verlag, New York (1981)
5. Walesiak M.: Uogólniona miara odległości GDM w statystycznej analizie 
   wielowymiarowej z wykorzystaniem programu R. Wyd. Uniwersytetu Ekonomicznego we 
   Wrocławiu, Wrocław (2011)
