Parsimonious Mixtures of Seemingly Unrelated Contaminated Normal Regression Models

Gabriele Perrone and Gabriele Soffritti

In recent years, the research into multivariate linear regression based on finite mixture
models has been intense. With such an approach, it is possible to perform regression
analysis for a multivariate response by taking account of the possible presence of
several unknown homogeneous groups, each of which is characterised by a different
linear regression model. For a continuous multivariate response, mixtures of normal
regression models are generally employed. However, in real data, mildly atypical
observations can negatively affect the estimation of the regression parameters under
a normal distribution in each mixture component. Robust methods insensitive to the
presence of such observations have been recently introduced [1]. Furthermore, in
some fields of research, a multivariate regression model with a different vector of
covariates for each response should be specified, based on some prior information
to be conveyed in the analysis. This approach has been recently embedded into the
framework of Gaussian mixture models [2]. To take account of all these aspects,
mixtures of seemingly unrelated contaminated normal regression models has been
defined [3]. A further extension is presented here so as to ensure parsimony, which
is obtained by imposing constraints on the component-covariance matrices. The
resulting parsimonious mixtures of seemingly unrelated contaminated regression
models are described together with an illustration of their practical usefulness.

Keywords: contaminated normal distribution, ecm algorithm,  mixture of regression models, 
          model-based cluster analysis, seemingly unrelated regression.

References
1. Mazza, A., Punzo, A.: Mixtures of multivariate contaminated normal regression models. Stat.
   Pap. 169, 787–822 (2020)
2. Galimberti, G., Soffritti, G.: Seemingly unrelated clusterwise linear regression. Adv. Data
   Anal. Classif. 14, 235–260 (2020)
3. Perrone, G., Soffritti, G.: Seemingly unrelated clusterwise linear regression for contaminated
   data. Under review (2021)



