An Introduction to S-Concordance and S-Discordance

Edwin Diday

In the 17th century, Galileo Galilei gave a duty to humanity by saying that we have to
measure everything that is measurable and “make measurable” everything which is
not. Here, our aim is to “make measurable” the notions of “concordance” and “discordance” 
usually used between behaviours, events, ideas, results, etc. For example, we can measure 
the “concordance” between a country and the European countries for some given variables 
related to corona. Also, the “concordance” of a solar star with a collection of solar stars 
having a planet, the “concordance” of a stock and a portfolio of stocks in their behaviour 
during a given period, a new species with a family of species, etc. The Kendall “concordance” 
and “discordance” are used to compare ordinal variables, that is why “s-concordance” and 
“s-discordance” are used here (“s” for “symbolic” as symbolic data are used). The “s-concordance” 
or “s-discordance” definition between a class c and a collection P of given classes for
a given value x (or vector of values), needs two basic densities. Roughly said, the
first is f_c(x) which expresses the proportion of the x value of a descriptive variable
(which can be multidimensional) inside the class c and the second is g_x(c) which
expresses the proportion of classes of P which have a proportion of the x value
equal or close to f_c(x). Then, the “s-concordance” (resp. s-discordance) denoted
S_conc(c, P, x) (resp. S_disc(c, P, x)) satisfies natural axioms. From the given data,
specific families of concordance can be induced by using the copulas obtained from
the joint distribution function of the random variables which densities are f_c and g_x.
S-concordance and s-discordance differ from similarities and dissimilarities by their
meaning but also by their axiomatic definition. The s-discordance has as a specific
case the Tf-Idf. S-concordance and s-discordance have numerous impacts in data
science. These impacts are illustrated in the case of the k-means, dynamical clustering, 
hierarchical or pyramidal clustering, mixture decomposition, Latent Dirichlet Allocation, 
statistical inference and likelihood. A potential application in genomics is presented.

Keywords: symbolic data analysis, s-concordance, s-discordance, copulas

References
1. Diday, E.: Explanatory tools for Machine Learning in the Symbolic Data Analysis framework.
   In: Diday, E., Guan, R., Saporta, G., Wang, H. (eds.) Advances in Data Science. ISTE-Wiley
   (2020)
2. Nelsen, R.B. An Introduction to Copulas. Lecture Notes in Statistics. Springer (1998)
