Political and Religion Attitudes in Greece: Behavioral Discourses

Georgia Panagiotidou and Theodore Chadjipadelis

The research presented in this paper attempts to explore the relationship between
religious and political attitudes. More specifically we investigate how religious 
behavior, in terms of belief intensity and practice frequency, is related to specific
patterns of political behavior such as ideology, understanding democracy and his set
of moral values. The analysis is based on the use of multivariable methods and more
specifically Hierarchical Cluster Analysis and Multiple Correspondence Analysis
in two steps. The findings are based on a survey implemented in 2019 on a sample of
506 respondents in the wider area of Thessaloniki, Greece. The aim of the research is
to highlight the role of people’s religious practice intensity in shaping their political
views by displaying the profiles resulting from the analysis and linking individual
religious and political characteristics as measured with various variables. The final
output of the analysis is a map where all variable categories are visualized, bringing
forward models of political behavior as associated together with other factors such
as religion, moral values and democratic attitudes.

Keywords: political behavior, religion, democracy, multivariate methods, data analysis

References
1. Greenacre, M.: Correspondence Analysis in Practice. Chapman and Hall/CRC Press, Boca
   Raton (2007)
2. Marangudakis, M. Chadjipadelis, T.: The Greek Crisis and its Cultural Origins. Palgrave
   Macmillan, New York (2019)
3. Mayer, N.: Les modeles explicatifs du vote. L’Harmatan, Paris (1997)
4. Michelat, G., Simon, M.: Classe, Religion et Comportement Politique. PFNSP-Editions 
   Sociales, Paris (1977)
5. Panagiotidou, G., Chadjipadelis, T.: First-time Voters in Greece: Views and Attitudes of 
   Youth on Europe and Democracy. In Theodore Chadjipadelis, Berthold Lausen, Angelos Markos,
   Tae Rim Lee, Angela Montanari and Rebecca Nugent (Eds), Studies in Classification, Data
   Analysis and Knowledge Organization, 415-429, Springer (2020)
6. Papadimitriou, G., Florou, G.: Contribution of the Euclidean and chi-square metrics to 
   determining the most ideal clustering in ascending hierarchy (in Greek). In Annals in Honor 
   of Professor I. Liakis, 546-581. University of Macedonia, Thessaloniki (1996)
7. Rose, R.: Electoral Behavior: a comparative Handbook. Free Press, New York (1974)





