Supervised Classification via Neural Networks for replicated Point Patterns

Katerina Pawlasova, Iva Karafiatova, and Jiri Dvorak

A spatial point pattern is a collection of points observed in a bounded region of R^d,
d ≥ 2. Individual points represent, e.g., observed locations of cell nuclei in a tissue
(d = 2) or centers of undesirable air bubbles in industrial materials (d = 3). The main
goal of this paper is to show the possibility of solving the supervised classification
task for point patterns via neural networks with general input space [3]. To predict
the class membership for a newly observed pattern, we compute an empirical estimate of 
a selected functional characteristic (e. g., the pair correlation function). Then,
we consider this estimated function to be a functional variable that enters the input 
layer of the network. A short simulation example illustrates the performance of the proposed 
classifier in the situation where the observed patterns are generated from two models with 
different spatial interactions. In addition, the proposed classifier is compared with 
convolutional neural networks [1] (with point patterns represented by binary images) and kernel 
regression. Kernel regression classifiers for point patterns have been studied in our previous 
work [2], and we consider them a benchmark in this setting.

Keywords: spatial point patterns, pair correlation function, supervised classification, 
          neural networks, functional data

References
1. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., Courville, A.: Deep Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge (2016)
2. Konasova, K., Dvorak, J.: Techniques from functional data analysis adaptable for spatial point ´
   patterns (2021) Available as a part of the Proceedings of the 22nd European Young Statisticians
   Meeting. https://www.eysm2021.panteion.gr/publications.html. Cited 10 Jan 2022
3. Thind, B., Multani, K., Cao, J.: Deep Learning with Functional Inputs (2020) Available via
   arxiv. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.09590.pdf. Cited 10 Jan 2022







