The Death Process in Italy Before and During the Covid-19 Pandemic: 
a Functional Compositional Approach

Riccardo Scimone, Alessandra Menafoglio, Laura M. Sangalli, 
and Piercesare Secchi

In this talk, based on [1], we propose a spatio-temporal analysis of daily death
counts in Italy, collected by ISTAT (Italian Statistical Institute), in Italian provinces
and municipalities. While in [1] the focus was on the elderly class (70+ years old),
we here focus on the middle class (50-69 years old), carrying out analogous analyses
and comparative observations. We analyse historical provincial data starting from
2011 up to 2020, year in which the impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic on the overall
death process are assessed and analysed. The cornerstone of our analysis pipeline
is a novel functional compositional representation for the death counts during each
calendar year: specifically, we work with mortality densities over the calendar year,
embedding them in the Bayes space B^2 of probability density functions. This Hilbert
space embedding allows for the formulation of functional linear models, which are
used to split each yearly realization of the mortality density process in a predictable
and an unpredictable component, based on the mortality in previous years. The
unpredictable components of the mortality density are then spatially analysed in
the framework of Object Oriented Spatial Statistics. Via spatial downscaling of the
results obtained at the provincial level, we obtain smooth predictions at the fine
scale of Italian municipalities; this also enable us to perform anomaly detection,
identifying municipalities which behave unusually with respect to the surroundings

Keywords: covid-19, o2s2, functional data analysis, spatial downscaling

References
1. Scimone, R., Menafoglio, A., Sangalli, L.M., Secchi,P. (2021): A look at the 
   spatio-temporal mortality patterns in Italy during the COVID-19 pandemic through 
   the lens of mortality densities. Spatial Statistics, 
   doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spasta.2021.100541, preprint available 
   at https://mox.polimi.it/reports-and-theses/publication-results/?id=952








