Statistical Assessment of Youth Inclusion in the National Labour Markets

Beata Bal-Domanska

The situation of youth in the labour market has been supported by national and 
regional policies for many years. Despite the implemented activities aimed at 
enhancing their professional standing, in many regions their situation is still 
unfavourable comparing that of adults [1]. An attempt was taken up to develop the 
typology of national labour markets regarding the inclusion of youth in terms of 
dynamics and statistics. The inclusiveness of labour markets was defined as a 
characteristic of the economy in which access to jobs is similar in all groups of 
the economically active people. Classification methods (Ward’s method) and regression 
methods determining long-term inclusiveness were used to develop the procedure for the 
European labour markets typology in terms of youth inclusion [2]. As a result, the 
countries were divided into 4 groups (favourable labour market for both youth and adults
groups of workers; unfavourable for youth; difficult labour market; difficult labour
market, particularly for youth) along with an assessment of the youth inclusion level.
Based on the conducted analysis, it was concluded that in 2020 as many as 12 countries 
out of 28 EU countries were included in the difficult labour market, particularly
for youth group, another 11 represented the countries whose labour market situation
can be characterized as unfavourable for youth, two countries (Latvia, Greece) were
classified in the difficult labour market group, i.e. the countries where high 
unemployment rate was accompanied by high youth inclusion level. Only the following 
3 countries were included in the favoured labour market group: Germany, Austria and
Denmark.

Keywords: typology, panel data models, regression, labour market, youth, 
          european countries

References
1. Asteriou D., Hall G.Stephen: Applied Econometrics. Macmillan Education, Palgrave, (2016)
2. Choudhry, M.T., Marelli, E., Signorelli, M.: Youth and total unemployment rate: The impact
   of policies and institutions. Rivista Internazionale Di Scienze Sociali 121, 63–86 (2013)











