A New Decomposition of Orthogonal Matrices with Application to Common Principal Components

Luca Bagnato and Antonio Punzo

In many statistical problems, the estimation of a (d × d) orthogonal matrix Q is 
involved [2]. The orthonormality constraints on Q often makes this estimation difficult.
To cope with this problem, we use the well-known PLU decomposition [3], which
factorizes any invertible (d × d) matrix as the product of a (d × d) permutation
matrix P, a (d × d) unit lower triangular matrix L, and a (d × d) upper triangular
matrix U. Thanks to the QR decomposition [3], we find the formulation of U when
the PLU decomposition is applied to Q. We call the result as PLR decomposition;
it produces a one-to-one correspondence between Q and the d (d − 1) /2 entries
below the diagonal of L, which are advantageously unconstrained real values. Thus,
once the decomposition is applied, regardless of the objective function under consideration, 
we can use any classical unconstrained optimization method to find the minimum (or maximum) 
of the objective function with respect to L. For illustrative purposes, we apply the PLR 
decomposition in common principle components  analysis (CPCA) for the maximum likelihood 
estimation of the common orthogonal matrix when a multivariate leptokurtic-normal distribution 
is assumed in each group. Compared to the commonly used normal distribution, the leptokurtic-normal
has an additional parameter governing the excess kurtosis [1]; this makes the estimation of Q in 
CPCA more robust against mild outliers. The usefulness of the PLR decomposition in leptokurtic-normal 
CPCA is illustrated by two biometric data analyses.

Keywords: orthogonal matrix, matrix decomposition, common principal components, fg algorithm, 
          leptokurtic-normal distribution

References
1. Bagnato, L., and Punzo, A., and Zoia, M.G.: The Multivariate Leptokurtic-Normal 
   Distribution and its Application in Model-Based Clustering. Can. J. Stat. 45, 
   95–119 (2017)
2. Graybill, F.A.: An Introduction to Linear Statistical Models. McGraw-Hill (1976)
3. Lutkepohl, H.: Handbook of Matrices. John Wiley & Sons, Chicester (1996)
