An Ultrametric Model for Clustering and Dimensionality Reduction

Giorgia Zaccaria

The study of multidimensional phenomena is currently growing with the complexity
of the reality, raising the need for methodologies to explore the relationships between
their many facets. Multidimensional phenomena are often explained by nested latent
concepts ordered in a hierarchical, tree structure, whose characterization can differ
in heterogeneous populations. In this work, a new parsimonious parameterization
of the covariance matrix able to pinpoint a hierarchical structure on variables is
proposed, and implemented into a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). The proposal
is based upon the definition of an ultrametric matrix [2], which is one-to-one
associated with a hierarchy of latent concepts. Its implementation into a GMM aims,
on one hand, at introducing a new parsimonious GMM with a reduced number of
parameters and, on the other hand, at identifying a different characterization of the
phenomenon under study for each component (subpopulation) of the mixture. With
respect to the existing parsimonious parameterizations of the component covariance
structure, e.g., the eigen-decomposition [1] and the decomposition based on Factor
Analysis [3], the ultrametric GMM works particularly well in situations where a
hierarchy over variables can be identified. Nonetheless, the proposal shows good
performance also when a general (non-hierarchical) covariance structure is assumed
for the data. The application of the proposal to real data concerning well-being and a
benchmark data set illustrates its potentials to explore multidimensional phenomena
in a heterogeneous population.

Keywords: ultrametric models, parsimonious parameterization, model-based clustering, 
          hierarchy of latent concepts

References
1. Banfield, J., Raftery, A.: Model-based Gaussian and non-Gaussian clustering. Biometrics.
   49(3), 803-–821 (1993)
2. Dellacherie, C., Martinez, S., San Martin, J.: Inverse M-matrices and ultrametric matrices.
   Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Springer, Switzerland (2014)
3. McLachlan, G, Peel, D.: Mixtures of factor analyzers. In: Langley, P. (ed.) Proceedings of the
   seventeenth international conference on machine learning, pp 599–606. Morgan Kaufmann,
   San Francisco (2000)













