Combining Latent Class Analysis and Multiple Correspondence Analysis

Alice Barth

Both Latent Class Analysis (LCA) and Multiple Correspondence Analysis (MCA)
are analysis methods to find patterns in complex categorical data tables. LCA 
aims at representing heterogeneity in the observed data by estimating internally 
homogeneous groups (the latent classes). It can thus be understood as a 
probability-based clustering approach. MCA is a scaling method that reduces the 
dimensionality of a multi-way frequency table. As such, it is an extension of 
simple correspondence analysis (CA) for two-way frequency tables. Both CA and MCA 
are often used to visualize relations in a lower-dimensional space. Several 
possibilities of combining LCA and correspondence analysis have been discussed. 
Some authors use MCA as a diagnostic tool to select variables which are subsequently 
used in an LCA. Others propose to visualize results from an LCA using CA [1].
  In this presentation, a different approach is discussed: the projection of LCA 
results as passive variables into a two-dimensional space created by MCA, using the 
example of relations between attitudes towards migration and socio-demographic 
characteristics in Germany (World Values Survey Round 7, 2017). First, latent structures 
in attitudes towards migration are estimated based on eight items such as ”immigration
in your country increases unemployment” with answer options ”agree”, ”disagree” and ”hard 
to say”. Information criteria indicate a four-class-solution. Second, a ”social space” is 
constructed via MCA. Here, socio-demographic characteristics such as gender, highest 
educational qualification, occupational group and size of town of residence are used. 
The association of latent class membership with certain sociodemographic characteristics 
is assessed by projecting the categories of the latent class variable (modal posterior 
probabilities) into the two-dimensional MCA solution. Further, possibilities of preserving 
information on individuals’ probabilities of class membership in this approach are discussed.

Keywords: categorical data, latent class analysis, correspondence analysis

References
1. McCutcheon, A.: Correspondence Analysis Used Complimentary to Latent Class Analysis in
   Comparative Social Research. In: Blasius, J., Greeenacre, M. (eds.) Visualization of 
   CategoricalData, pp. 477-488. Academic Press (1998)














