Kernel Smoothing-Based Probability Contours for Tumour Segmentation

Wenhui Zhang and Surajit Ray

Statistical imaging together with other machine learning techniques are the epitome
of digitalizing healthcare and are culminating towards developing innovative tools
for automatic analysis of three-dimensional radiological images — PET (Positron
Emission Tomography) images [1]. However, the three major challenges in radiology are: 
(1) increasing demand for medical imaging (2) decreasing turnaround times
caused by mass data (3) diagnostic accuracy that leads to a quantification of images.
To address these challenges along with ethical issues regarding the use of Artificial
Intelligence in patient care, there is a need to develop a new framework of statistical
analysis which can be readily used by clinicians and can be trained with a relatively
lower number of samples. Most existing algorithms segments a 2D slice by assigning the 
grid of pixels into the tumour or non-tumour class. Instead of a pixel-level
analysis, we will assume that the true intensity comes from a smooth underlying
spatial process which can be modelled by a kernel estimates [2]. In this project, we
have developed a kernel smoothing-based probability contour method on PET image
segmentation, which provides a surface over images that produces contour-based
results rather than pixel-wise results, thus mimicking human observers’ behaviour.
In addition, our methodology provides the tools for developing a probabilistic approach 
with uncertainty measurement along with the segmentation. Our method is computational 
efficient and can produce reproductive and robust results for tumour detection, 
delineation and radiotherapy planning, together with other complementary modalities, 
such as CT (Computed  tomography) images.

Keywords: medical image segmentation, positron emission tomography, kernel, 
          3d contouring, multi-modal segmentation

References
1. Hatt, M., et al.: Classification and evaluation strategies of auto-segmentation 
   approaches for PET: Report of AAPM task group No. 211. Med. Phys. 44, e1–e42 (2017)
2. Matioli, L.C., et al.: A new algorithm for clustering based on kernel density 
   estimation. J. Appl. Stat. 45, 347–366 (2018)














