Multivariate Mapping of Soil Organic Carbon and Nitrogen

Stephan van der Westhuizen, David P. Hofmeyr, and Gerard B.M. Heuvelink

Soil maps, which can be effectively produced with statistical models in digital
soil mapping (DSM), contain vital information on the spatial distribution of soil
properties which are used in fields such as water- and land management and climate
studies [1]. Soil maps are usually produced in a univariate manner, that is, each map
is produced independently and therefore, when multiple soil properties are mapped
the underlying covariance structure between these soil properties is ignored. This
may lead to inconsistent soil maps, for example, organic carbon and nitrogen maps
produced independently may show unrealistic carbon-nitrogen ratios. The latter is
important as these ratios are used by map users to obtain information on residue
decomposition and the nitrogen cycle in the soil. In the last decade the production of
soil maps with machine learning models has become increasingly popular as these
models are able to quantify complex non-linear relationships between a soil property
and the environmental covariates. However, producing soil maps with multivariate
machine learning models is still lacking and requires much investigation in DSM. In
this talk we present the simultaneous mapping of soil organic carbon and nitrogen for
the region consisting of Belgium, The Netherlands, Luxembourg, and Germany. The
simultaneous mapping is performed with a multivariate random forest model [2],
and we compare this model to that of two separate univariate random forest models.

Keywords: random forest, digital soil mapping, multivariate analysis, 
          machine learning

References
1. McBratney, A. B., Mendonça Santos, M.L., Minasny, B.: On digital soil mapping. 
   Geoderma. 117, 3–52 (2003)
2. Segal, M., Xiao, Y.: Multivariate random forests. WIREs Data Min. Knowl. Discovery. 
   1, 80–87 (2011)














