Genomic Prediction Using Machine Learning Methods: 
Performance Comparison on Synthetic and Empirical Data

Vanda Lourenço, Joseph Ogutu, Rui Rodrigues, and Hans-Peter Piepho

The accurate prediction of genomic breeding values is central to genomic selection
(GS) in both plant and animal breeding studies. Genomic prediction (GP) involves
the use of thousands of molecular markers spanning the entire genome and therefore
requires methods able to efficiently handle high dimensional data. Machine learning
(ML) methods, which encompass different groups of supervised and unsupervised
learning methods, are becoming widely advocated for and used in GP studies. Although 
several studies have compared the predictive performances of individual
methods, studies comparing the predictive performance of different groups of methods 
are rare. However, such studies are crucial for identifying (i) groups of methods
with superior predictive performance and assessing (ii) the merits and demerits of
such groups of methods relative to each other and to the established classical methods. 
Here, we comparatively evaluate in terms of predictive accuracy and prediction
errors (mean squared and mean absolute prediction errors) the genomic predictive
performance of several groups of supervised ML methods. Specifically, regularized 
(regularized, adaptive-regularized and group-regularized), ensemble (random
forests and stochastic gradient boosting), instance-based (support vector machine)
and deep-learning (feed-forward neural network) methods, using one simulated
dataset (animal breeding population; three distinct traits) and three empirical maize
breeding datasets (same trait; three distinct years). All the methods showed reasonably 
high predictive performance for most practical selection decisions. However, our
results show that the relative predictive performance of the groups of ML methods
depends upon both the data and target traits and that for classical regularized methods, 
increasing model complexity can incur huge computational cost but does not
necessarily always substantially improve predictive accuracy. This rules out selection
of one benchmark procedure among ML methods for genomic prediction.

Keywords: genomic prediction, predictive accuracy, snps, supervised ml methods














