Impact Point Selection in Semiparametric Bifunctional Models

Silvia Novo, German Aneiros, and Philippe Vieu

Nowadays, most applied sciences have to deal with datasets containing one, or more,
functional object. Thus, developing techniques for functional data analysis with high
level of flexibility and interpretability has become a target in statistical research.
  Accordingly, a new sparse semiparametric model is proposed, which incorporates
the influence of two functional random variables in a scalar response in a flexible and
interpretable manner. One of the functional covariates is included through a singleindex 
structure, while the other is included linearly through the high-dimensional
vector formed by its discretised observations. Due to the sparse nature of the linear
component, variable selection is needed (see [1] for a review). The problem is that
standard variable selection methods (such that the proposed in [2]) can provide inadequate 
results. Then, two new algorithms are presented for selecting impact points in
the linear component and estimating the model (see [3] for details). Both procedures
utilise the functional origin of linear covariates. Finite sample experiments demonstrated 
the scope of application of both algorithms. Some asymptotic results support
both procedures. A real data application showed the applicability of the presented
methodology from a predictive perspective and low computational cost.

Keywords: functional data analyisis, variable selection, semiparametric regression

References
1. Aneiros, G., Novo, S., Vieu, P.: Variable selection in functional regression models: 
   A review, J. Multivariate Anal., 188, 104871, (2021)
2. Novo, S., Aneiros, G., Vieu, P.: Sparse semiparametric regression when predictors are 
   mixture of functional and high-dimensional variables. Test, 30, 481–504 (2021)
3. Novo, S., Vieu, P., Aneiros, G.: Fast and efficient algorithms for sparse semiparametric 
   bifunctional regression, Aust. N. Z. J. Stat., 63, 606–638 (2021)















