The Biplot Inner Product for Interpretation and Derivation of Eigenvector Methods

Cajo J. F. ter Braak

To celebrate K. Ruben Gabriel’s biplot paper [1], I describe its influence, via my
supervisor Leo C. A. Corsten, on my first to last papers (1981-2021) and on my
teaching. Being not just a plot of two sets of items, Gabriel’s biplot shifted attention
from the meaning of individual PCA axes to inference from the first 2-3 axes together
via the inner product interpreted geometrically, namely as the product of the arrow
lengths and the cosine of their angle or as the product of the lengths of the one
arrow and the other projected on to it. These simple equations cannot only be
used for interpreting biplots, I will show that they can also be used to derive the
eigen equations. Whereas later, even non-linear, extensions turned the arrows in to
calibrated, possibly curved, lines, I always promoted inference using the rank order
of the projection points.
  Gabriel showed that the biplot could be used beyond PCA, for example, in canonical
correlation analysis and variants thereof [2]. Double-constrained correspondence
analysis even allows for plots with four sets of items, pairs of which approximated
different summary statistics of the method [3].
  I will also briefly describe how the distinction between predictive and interpolative
biplot was discovered and how multivariate analysis was taught in the 70-80s in
France and Japan, compared to the English literature that was focussing more on
weighted least-squares approximation and Gabriel’s biplot interpretation of factorial
diagrams.

Keywords: biplot, inner product, pca, canonical correlation analysis, 
          double constrained correspondence analysis

References
1. Gabriel, K.R.: The biplot graphic display of matrices with application to principal 
   component analysis. Biometrika 58, 453–467 (1971)
2. ter Braak, C.J.F.: Interpreting canonical correlation analysis through biplots of 
   structural correlations and weights. Psychometrika. 55, 519–531 (1990)
3. ter Braak, C.J.F., Smilauer, P., Dray, S.: Algorithms and biplots for double constrained 
   correspondence analysis. Environ. Ecol. Stat. 25, 171–197 (2018)
















