Probabilistic Clustering with Local Alignement of Italian COVID-19 Death Curves

Marzia A. Cremona, Tobia Boschi, and Francesca Chiaromonte

Italy is one of the most hardly hit countries in the world by the COVID-19 pandemic.
A striking aspect of the pandemic in Italy has been its heterogeneity. Indeed, Italian
regions were hit at different times and with different strengths, especially during the
first wave. We consider official COVID-19 death curves, as well as excess mortality
curves for the 20 Italian regions. The goal is to cluster these misaligned functional
data, in order to assess whether there are regions sharing similar pandemic patterns
[1]. Importantly, we are looking for clusters based on a local similarity among curves,
since patterns might differ only on a (misaligned) portion of the domain.
  We develop probabilistic K-mean with local alignment (probKMA), a new functional data 
analysis method to locally cluster a set of curves and discover functional motifs, i.e. 
typical “shapes” that may recur several times along and across the curves capturing 
important local characteristics of these curves [2]. Using probKMA as a probabilistic 
clustering method to group COVID-19 curves we find two starkly different first waves of 
COVID-19 pandemics; an “exponential” one unfolding in Lombardia and the worst-hit areas 
of the north, and a milder, “flat(tened)” one in the rest of the country. Local alignments 
of curves provide an indication of the lags between different regions, which can be employed 
in subsequent analyses to associate patterns of mortality with functional covariates such as 
mobility and positivity [1].

Keywords: functional data analysis, local clustering, covid-19

References
1. Boschi, T., Di Iorio, J., Testa, L., Cremona, M.A., Chiaromonte F.: Functional data 
   analysis characterizes the shapes of the first COVID-19 epidemic wave in Italy. 
   Scientific Reports 11:17054 (2021)
2. Cremona, M.A., Chiaromonte F.: Probabilistic K-mean with local alignment for clustering
   and motif discovery in functional data. arXiv 1808.04773 (2020)
















