Model Based Clustering and Outlier Detection with Missing Data

Cristina Tortora, Hung Tong, and Louis Tran

Cluster analysis is a data analysis technique that aims to produce smaller groups
of similar observations in a data set. In model-based clustering, the population is
assumed to be a convex combination of sub-populations, each of which is modeled by 
a probability distribution. When the data are characterized by outliers the
multivariate Student-t (T) and the contaminated normal distribution (CN) provide
robust parameter estimates and therefore are more suitable choices compared to
Gaussian Mixture models. Recently, the T and CN distributions have been extended
to accommodate different tail behaviors across principal components, the models
are referred to as multiple scaled distributions, i.e., MST and MSCN respectively.
The mixture of CN has the advantage of automatically detecting outliers while the
MSCN distribution, has the advantage of directional robust parameter estimates and
outlier detection. The term “directional” implies that the parameter estimation and
outlier detection procedures work separately for each principal component. Some
practical limitations of the mentioned models are that they require the number of
clusters to be known and the data set to be complete. This work has overcome the two
mentioned limitations providing a study of indices to select the number of clusters
and presenting recent extensions of the CN and MSCN mixtures to cluster data that
contain values missing at random. All the discussed techniques are available in two
convenient R packages MSclust and MixtureMissing.

Keywords: model based clustering, outlier detection, missing values

References
1. Tong H., Tortora. C. Model-based clustering and outlier detection with missing data.
   Advances in data analysis and classification, 1-26 2022
2. Tran L. and Tortora C. How Many Clusters Are Best? Investigating Model Selection in 
   Robust Clustering. In JSM Proceedings, Statistical Computing Section. Alexandria, VA: 
   American Statistical Association. 1159-1180 2021
3. Tong H., Tortora. C. Mixture Missing: Robust Model-Based Clustering for Data Sets with
   Missing Values at Random. R package v. 1.0.2. 2022
4. Tortora. C., Punzo A., Tran L. MSclust: Multiple-Scaled Clustering. R package v. 1.0. 
   2022
















