Biplots Based on Latent Variable Models in the Analysis of Ecological Communities

Jenni Niku and Sara Taskinen

Throughout the last decade, joint species distribution modelling concept (JSDM,
[1]) has gained popularity in the analysis of species communities, where the object
of interests is usually in describing and understanding the structure and dynamics of
a group of interacting species. JSDMs offer a flexible approach for determining and
assessing the mechanisms that drive the communities to exhibit patterns in observed
species communities. One particular JSDM approach, which we focus on, is based on
generalized linear latent variable models (GLLVMs,[2]). The GLLVMs are closely
related to latent factor models which are applicable in several fields of science, but
here we consider them in the analysis of species communities.
  While being capable to model, for example, environmental factors on species
abundances and species-to-species associations, the GLLVMs also provide a modelbased 
tool for producing ordinations and biplots, thus providing a powerful tool for 
visualizing those species-to-species associations and connecting them to the
environmental or underlying latent factors driving the species communities. We
introduce the GLLVMs and show how they can be used for producing biplots. In
addition, some useful properties of methods are illustrated by applying them to an
ecological dataset.

Keywords: biplot, latent variable model, joint species distribution model,
          species community

References
1. Warton, D.I., Guillaume Blanchet, F., O’Hara, R.B., Ovaskainen, O., Taskinen, S., 
   Walker, S.C., Hui, F.K.C.: So Many Variables: Joint Modeling in Community Ecology. 
   Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 30(12), 766–779 (2015)
2. Niku, J., Warton, D.I., Hui, F.K.C., Taskinen, S.: Generalized linear latent variable 
   models for multivariate count and biomass data in ecology. Journal of Agricultural, 
   Biological and Environmental Statistics, 22(4), 498–522 (2017)
















