Pooled Mean and Confidence Interval Estimation Combining Different 
Sets of Summary Statistics

Flora Ferreira, José Soares, Fernanda Sousa, Filipe Magalhães, Isabel Ribeiro, 
and Pedro Pacheco

Meta-analysis is increasingly used to combine the results of several studies in order
to estimate the outcome of interest. When considering a continuous outcome, commonly 
to estimate pooled mean and confidence interval sample means and standard
deviations of primary studies are necessary, which are absent sometimes. Instead,
the median along with various measures of spread are reported. Recently, the task of
including the studies with the sample size, the median, the range, and/or the quartiles
range, in the pooled mean meta-analysis has been achieved by estimating the sample
mean and standard deviation of each study [1]. The methods proposed in [1] and in
other previous studies (e.g. [2]) to estimate the missing sample mean and standard
deviation have been widely used to meta-analyze the means mostly in medical research. 
Each of these methods assumes that the sets of summary statistics reported
in the studies include the median, the sample size, and as measures of spread the
minimum and maximum values and/or the first and third quartiles, not covering all
possibilities. Some studies report 10th and 90th percentiles (interdecile range) as
an additional or unique measure of spread. In this study, we present an approach
to estimate the pooled mean and its confidence interval using the estimated means
and standard deviations of studies with different sets of summary statistics as an
extension of previous works. Simulation studies were used to evaluate the performance 
of the existing and proposed approaches. Finally, real data in current market
research which is of great value to support companies’ decision-making including
salary estimate and product price estimate were empirically evaluated.

Keywords: confidence interval, meta-analysis, pool data

References
1. McGrath, S., et al.: Estimating the sample mean and standard deviation from commonly
   reported quantiles in meta-analysis. Stat. Methods Med. Res. 29 (9), 2520–2537 (2020)
2. Luo, D., et al.: : Optimally estimating the sample mean from the sample size, median, 
   mid-range, and/or mid-quartile range. Stat. Methods Med. Res. 27(6), 1785–1805 (2018)
















