The Weighted RV Coefficient: Exact Moments by Invariant Orthogonal Integration

François Bavaud

Weighted configurations (f, D), describing the squared Euclidean dissimilarities D
between n objects endowed with a normalized vector of weights f, are pervasive
in Data Analysis. Weighted classical MDS, returning the configuration coordinates
maximizing the low-dimensional proportion of inertia, obtains as a straightforward
generalization of the well-known Torgerson-Gower procedure. It is based upon the
spectral decomposition of the matrix of weighted scalar products or kernel K.
  Comparing two weighted configurations (f, D_X) and (f, D_Y ) with identical
weights f can be performed by computing the coefficient CV_XY = trace(K_X K_Y),
or its normalized version RV_XY = CV_XY / \sqrt(CV_XX CV_YY) \in [0, 1], which 
constitutes the weighted extension of the RV similarity coefficient [1].
  In the literature, there seems to be no complete agreement for the expressions of
the null expectation of the RV first moments, permitting to asses the significance of
the association between two configurations. We propose a new procedure consisting
to integrate out products of orthogonal matrices occurring in the spectral decompositions 
of K_X and K_Y , yielding exact expressions for the three first moments of
the weighted RV coefficient; they depend on n and on the spectral moments of the
eigenvalues of K_X and K_Y (their scree graphs), but not on f.
  Besides its relevance for applications (the scope of data analytic problems able to
be expressed by various kernels, including conditional kernels, seems inexhaustible),
the present approach sheds new light on some formal issues of interest, such as:
• Under the null distribution, the skewness of the RV coefficient is here proportional
  to the product of both spectral skewness, thus implying a positive RV skewness
  for most ”natural” configurations, as often noticed in the literature [2].
• The traditional Moran test of spatial auto-correlation fits info the present framework, 
  and its application can be generalized to multivariate features (and weighted
  regions) by the introduction of an exact variance-deflating correction.

Keywords: weighted rv coefficient, permutation test, orthogonal haar integration

References
1. Robert, P. and Escoufier, Y.: A unifying tool for linear multivariate statistical methods: 
   the RV-coefficient. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C 25(3), 257–265 (1976)
2. Josse, J., Pagès, J., and Husson, F.: Testing the significance of the RV coefficient. 
   Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 53(1), 82–91 (2008)


















