Covariate Selection Method in Propensity Score Model for the Quantile Treatment Effect Estimation

Takehiro Shoji, Jun Tsuchida, and Hiroshi Yadohisa

Estimation of a treatment effect, which is the impact of a treatment on an outcome, 
is important in some research areas, such as econometrics, social programs, and 
policies. Quantile treatment effects (QTE) are primarily used in econometrics because
they can characterize the heterogeneous treatment effects on different points of an
outcome distribution. For estimating QTE, Firpo [2] proposed an estimation method
using propensity scores.
  In estimating of treatment effects using propensity scores, selection of covariates to
include propensity score model is an important issue, and it is known that it is better
to include covariates that are relevant to the outcome [1]. For achieving this issues,
Outcome Adaptive Lasso (OAL) was employed as a covariate selection method for
propensity score models[3]. However, OAL assumes an average treatment effect estimation 
and not a quantile treatment effect estimation.
  In this study, we propose a covariate selection method that includes propensity score
models for quantile treatment effect estimation. Here, the central principle is changing 
the weight term from an outcome regression model to a quantile regression model. This allows 
for the selection of covariates related to an outcome at an interesting quantile corresponding 
to QTE. Through numerical experiments, we compare the proposed method’s performance with that 
of the existing methods, such as OAL.

Keywords: propensity score, causal effect, quantile regression

References
1. Brookhart, M.A., Schneeweiss, S., Rothman, K.J., Glynn, R.J., Avorn, J., & Sturmer, T.:
   Variable selection for propensity score models. American journal of epidemiology. 163(12),
   1149–1156 (2006)
2. Firpo, S.: Efficient semiparametric estimation of quantile treatment effects. Econometrica.
   75(1), 259–276 (2007)
3. Shortreed, S.M., & Ertefaie, A.: Outcome-adaptive lasso: variable selection for causal 
   inference. Biometrics, 73(4), 1111–1122 (2017)


















